*Fine particulate matter predictions using high resolution aerosol
optical depth (AOD) retrievals*

Alexandra A. Chudnovsky^{1*,2}, Petros Koutrakis^{1}, Itai Kloog^{1,3},
Steven Melly^{1}, Francesco Nordio^{1}, Alexei Lyapustin^{4}, Yujie
Wang^{5}, and Joel Schwartz^{1}

^{1}Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA

[[mailto:achudnov@hsph.harvard.edu][achudnov@hsph.harvard.edu]], phone:
+1-617-3848846, 972-3-546996221

^{2}Department of Geography and Human Environment, Tel-Aviv University,
Israel

^{3}Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University, Israel

^{4}GEST / UMBC, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA

^{5}University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, USA

*Abstract*

To date, spatial-temporal patterns of particulate matter (PM) within
urban areas have primarily been examined using models. On the other
hand, satellites extend spatial coverage but their spatial resolution is
too coarse. In order to address this issue, here we report on spatial
variability in PM levels derived from high 1km resolution AOD product of
Multi-Angle Implementation of Atmospheric Correction (MAIAC) algorithm
developed for MODIS satellite images. We apply day-specific calibrations
of AOD data to predict PM_{2.5} concentrations within the New England
area of the United States. To improve the accuracy of our model, land
use and meteorological variables were incorporated. We used inverse
probability weighting (IPW) to account for nonrandom missingness of AOD
and nested regions within days to capture spatial variation in the daily
calibration across New England. With this approach we can control for
the inherent day-to-day variability in the AOD-PM_{2.5} relationship,
which depends on time-varying parameters such as particle optical
properties, vertical and diurnal concentration profiles and ground
surface reflectance among others. Out-of-sample "ten-fold"
cross-validation was used to quantify the accuracy of model predictions.
Our results show that the model-predicted PM_{2.5} mass concentrations
are highly correlated with the actual observations, with out-of-sample
R^{2}of 0.89. Furthermore, our study clearly shows that the model
captures the pollution levels along highways and many urban locations
thereby extending our ability to investigate the spatial patterns of
urban air quality, such as examining exposures in areas with high
traffic. Importantly, our results show high accuracy within the cities
of Boston and New Haven thereby indicating that MAIAC data can be used
to examine intra-urban exposure contrasts in PM_{2.5} levels.

*Keywords*: Particulate matter, PM_{2.5}, Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD),
High resolution aerosol retrieval, MAIAC, intra-urban pollution,
variability in PM_{2.5} levels, scales of pollution

*Introduction*

Numerous studies have reported associations between mortality and
morbidity outcomes and particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter≤2.5
μm (PM_{2.5}) (Dockery et al. 1993; Schwartz 1994; Schwartz et al.,
1995; Pope et al. 2002; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
2004). Although ground-level PM_{2.5} monitoring sites provide accurate
measurements, their spatial coverage is limited and thus often
insufficient to capture the PM_{2.5} spatial variability for exposure
and epidemiological studies.

Satellite imagery adds another important tool to air quality and
pollution monitoring due to its extensive spatial coverage and repeated
observations of the earth surface and atmosphere. The most common
parameter derived from satellite observations is the aerosol optical
depth (AOD), which is a measure of the extinction of electromagnetic
radiation at a given wavelength due to the presence of aerosols in an
atmospheric column. However, the satellite-derived AOD is a measure of
light attenuation in the column which is affected by ambient conditions
(e.g., humidity, vertical profile, chemical composition etc.), while
PM_{2.5} is a measure of dry particle mass near the surface; therefore,
these two parameters are not expected to be strongly correlated.

To date, spatial patterns of particle exposure within populated areas
have been examined by models, such as land use regression (Jerrett et
al., 2005; Hoek et al., 2008), line dispersion models such as CAlifornia
LINE Source Dispersion Model (CALINE, Benson 1984; Benson 1992), or
atmospheric chemistry and transport models such as GEOS-Chemical
transport model (CTM) ([[http://geos-chem.org]]). Indeed, it is
challenging to deploy hundreds of monitors, needed to measure spatial
variability in PM levels. On the other hand, satellites extend spatial
coverage but their spatial resolution is insufficient. The Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) onboard the Terra and Aqua
satellites provide a daily global coverage but the conventional
resolution of its aerosol product (10 km Dark Target (DT)) is often too
coarse for suitable exposure estimates in urban areas. The widely
anticipated 3 km MODIS AOD product is expected to be generated as a part
of Collection 6 re-processing (Levy et al., 2013; Remer et al., 2013).
Recently, a new Multi-Angle Implementation of Atmospheric Correction
(MAIAC) algorithm was developed for MODIS which provides aerosol
information at 1 km resolution (Lyapustin et al., 2011a,b). Several
studies published in the last 3 years have shown that high spatial
resolution is essential to detect spatial variability in PM levels
(Kumar et al., 2011) and in aerosol loadings at regional and at a
sub-10 km scale (e.g. intra-urban domain) (Emili et al., 2011,
Chudnovsky et al., 2013a). In another study Chudnovsky et al., (2013b)
showed that MAIAC provides a factor of 1.5-1.8 more data than the DT 10
km over New England; the improvement being over brighter urban surfaces
and partly cloudy days. However authors conducted straightforward
analyses of AOD vs PM_{2.5} association as a simple metric to compare
between 10 km and 1 km retrievals and its seasonal frequency without any
goal to provide PM_{2.5} estimates at the urban scale

Recently, several studies proposed that the effects of the time-varying
parameters influencing the AOD-PM_{2.5} relationship can be taken into
account with daily adjustments, resulting in much higher R^{2} than
previously reported in the literature, ranging from 0.83 to 0.92 (Lee et
al., 2011; Kloog et al., 2011; 2012; Chudnovsky et al., 2012).
Furthermore, Kloog et al., 2011 and Kloog et al., 2012 extended the
previously established model on day-specific calibrations of AOD data
using ground PM_{2.5} measurements by incorporating commonly used Land
Use (LU) and meteorological variables. The goal of the current study is
to investigate if the improved 1 km spatial resolution would better
explain the variations in PM_{2.5.} We use MAIAC 1 km resolution AOD
data from MODIS Aqua for the New England area to obtain daily PM_{2.5}
estimates for AOD retrieval days and explore its applicability at the
intra-urban scale. By further developing the approach described in Kloog
et al. (2011), we investigate the extent of spatial variability of the
AOD-PM_{2.5} relationship on a daily basis and show how this variability
can be captured by a mixed effects model approach during the period of
2003. Finally, we present the modeled spatial pattern of PM_{2.5} levels
within the study domain for selected days.

*2 Material and methods *

*2.1 Ground-level PM_{2.5} data*

Twenty-four hour PM_{2.5} concentrations were calculated at 62 U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) PM_{2.5} monitoring sites during
2003 (Figure 1). These include 14 sites in Maine (ME), 10 sites in New
Hampshire (NH), 6 sites in Vermont (VT), 16 sites in Massachusetts (MA),
16 sites in Connecticut (CT) and 2 sites in Rhode Island (RI). Sampling
frequency differed by site and included samples collected every day,
every third day, and every sixth day. Additionally, we used 24 hour
PM_{2.5} concentrations from the Harvard School of Public Health (HSPH)
supersite located near downtown Boston, MA.

*2.2 Satellite data*

A new algorithm MAIAC (Lyapustin et al. 2011a,b; 2012a) has been
developed to process MODIS data. MAIAC retrieves aerosol parameters over
land at 1 km resolution simultaneously with parameters of a surface
bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF). This is
accomplished by using a time series of MODIS measurements and
simultaneous processing of groups of pixels. The MAIAC algorithm ensures
that the number of measurements exceeds the number of unknowns, a
necessary condition for solving an inverse problem without empirical
assumptions typically used by current operational algorithms. The MODIS
time series accumulation also provides multi-angle coverage for every
surface grid cell, which is required for the BRDF retrievals from MODIS
data. The aerosol parameters include optical depth, Angstrom exponent
from 0.47 and 0.67 µm, and aerosol type including background, smoke and
dust models (Lyapustin et al., 2012b). The background models are
specified regionally based on the climatology of the Aerosol Robotic
Network (AERONET) (Holben et al. 1998) sun-photometer data for
relatively low AOD days (<0.5). The smoke/dust types are identified as
aerosols with increased shortwave absorption (Lyapustin et al., 2012b)
and dominant fine/coarse mode particles, respectively. AERONET
validation over the continental USA showed that the MAIAC and MODIS Dark
Target (DT) algorithms have a similar accuracy over dark and vegetated
surfaces, but also showed that MAIAC generally improves accuracy over
brighter surfaces, including most urban areas (Lyapustin et al. 2011b).
The improved accuracy of MAIAC results from using the explicit surface
characterization method in contrast to the empirical surface
parameterization approach, which is utilized in the DT algorithm.
Further, MAIAC incorporates a cloud mask (CM) algorithm based on
spatio-temporal analysis which augments traditional pixel-level cloud
detection techniques (Lyapustin et al., 2008). In this work, the
residual contamination by clouds and cloud shadows was additionally
reduced by discarding 2 pixels adjacent to detected clouds. Importantly,
the MAIAC approach becomes indispensable in heterogeneous aerosol
environments, /e.g/. with local sources such as fire smoke plumes or in
urban/industrial areas.

*2.3 Spatial (LU) and temporal (meteorology) predictors of PM_{2.5}*

Different land use (LU, spatial predictors) and meteorological (MET,
temporal predictors) variables were examined to improve the predictions
of PM_{2.5} at the 1 km scale. Whereas land use parameters enable us to
capture traffic and point sources, meteorological conditions can
influence the AOD-PM relationship and AOD retrieval accuracy. For
example, AOD generally increases with relative humidity for hygroscopic
particles due to hygroscopic growth (Bergin et al., 2000; Altaratz et
al., 2013).

Multiple LU and MET potential predictors of PM measured at EPA sites
within the grid cell were examined. Different sets of predictors were
combined and the model for each set was run. The selection of a best
model was based on the AIC score (Akaike information criterion, a
measure of the relative goodness of fit that is asymptotically related
to out of sample prediction R^{2}) to further backward-select the
variables in each combination. Finally, the combination of predictors
with the minimum AIC was selected. As a result of this work, the model
was constructed with the following spatial and temporal predictors:
percent of the grid cell that is urban, elevation, Normalized Difference
Vegetative Index (NDVI), major road density within a grid, distance to
PM_{2.5} point emissions, relative humidity, height of the planetary
boundary layer and wind speed.

2.3.1 Percent of urban areas

We used 30 m resolution 2001 national land cover data (NLCD). Data were
obtained as raster files with 30 m cell size from mrlc.gov. The ArcGIS
Spatial Analyst Neighborhood Focal Statistics tool was used to calculate
count of urban cells in 33 X 33 cell rectangle, where the category
“developed land” was counted as urban. Then, percent of urban spaces
data in 33 X 33 30 m cell rectangle surrounding each EPA monitor were
calculated.

2.3.2 Elevation

Elevation data above sea level in meters were obtained through the
national elevation dataset (NED) (Maune, 2007). NED is the distributed
by the U.S.Geological Survey (USGS) and provides seamless raster
elevation of the conterminous United States. A 30 m resolution raster
was created from 1/3 arc second data using ArcGIS.

2.3.3 Normalized Difference Vegetative Index

Satellite-derived normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) based on
red and near infrared (NIR) reflectances a temporal indicator of the
vegetation cover and its phenological state (Tucker et al., 1979; Tucker
and Sellers, 1986):

NDVI = (ρ ^{NIR} − ρ ^{RED})/(ρ ^{NIR} + ρ ^{RED}) (1)

 We used the 1km MODIS monthly vegetation indices product
(MOD13A3).Except for periods of spring green-up and fall senescence
associated with seasonal surface change, the NDVI can generally be
considered relatively constant on a monthly basis. Many other studies
suggested that NDVI was found to be good predictors for local means of
pollutant concentrations (e.g. Su et al., 2009).

2.3.4 Distance to PM_{2.5} point source emissions

PM_{2.5} point source emissions were obtained through the 2005 US EPA
National Emissions Inventory (NEI) facility emissions report (EPA,
2010). The distance (in km) from the AOD grid centroid to the nearest
point source emission (from the EPA emissions dataset, tons per year)
was calculated in ArcGIS. Out of the 62 monitors used in the analysis, 6
were within 150 m, 19 were within 550 m and 26 were within 2-10 km of an
industrial source, respectively.

2.3.5 Road density

Major roads were selected from ESRI Street Map data provided with ArcGIS
(version 10) using census Feature Classification Code (FCC) (e.g. A1:
primary highway with limited access, A2: primary road without limited
access, A3: secondary and connecting road). Road density was calculated
using ArcGIS to create a line density raster at a 1x1 km resolution to
match the AOD grid cells. We used all A1, A2 and A3 roads in our study
region. Thus each AOD gird cell was assigned the density (e.g. road
density) in each grid based on the density of intersecting roads in each
grid. Because the distributions of major roads were highly right-skewed,
we used a logarithmic transformation.

2.3.6 Temporal predictors: meteorological data

All meteorological variables used in the analysis (wind speed (WS),
relative humidity (RH)) were obtained through the national climatic data
center (NCDC) (NCDC, 2010). There were 44 active MET stations across
New-England during the study period. Daily meteorological (MET) data was
used in the analysis. Using ArcGIS we assigned to each AOD grid the
closest MET station in our dataset (based on multiple MET data sources
including EPA and The National Climatic Data Center (NCDC)). Height of
the planetary boundary layer (PBL) was obtained from the NOAA Reanalysis
Data.

*2.4 Statistical model*

We apply a mixed effects model approach to MAIAC AOD retrievals and
other meteorological and LU variables to predict PM_{2.5} concentrations
in each grid cell. This model allows for the regression intercepts and
slopes to vary daily in order to account for the inherent day-to-day
variability in the AOD-PM_{2.5} relationship. Furthermore, since New
England is a relatively large area and PM-AOD relationship can vary
spatially, we partitioned our study area into three sub-regions (Figure
1) and allowed for the daily AOD-PM_{2.5} slopes to vary by region.
Region 1 included ME, VT and NH states, region 2 included MA while CT
and RI formed region 3 in our analyses. Although there are some
variations among the three regions in topography and climate conditions
mostly via the usual north-south snow cover gradient in winter, the main
difference appears at the level of urbanization and land use affecting
surface brightness and thus the AOD vs PM_{2.5} relationships
(Chudnovsky et al., 2013b) and the quality of aerosol product. For
instance, validation analysis of MODIS 3km product (Munchak et al.,
2013) showed a strong correlation between percent of retrievals above
expected error and percent of the urban land cover. A similar
investigation is ongoing for MAIAC. Of the three, region 1 is least
urbanized with high fraction of forest cover and region 2 is most
urbanized. Thus, by dividing the study area into regions we can evaluate
the role of environmental conditions (e.g. snow coverage) and different
land use settings on AOD-PM_{2.5} relationship. We used the following
mixed effects model with random intercepts and slopes that was applied
on AOD retrieval days/pixels (Eq.2):

/PM_{ij} = (α + u_{j}+g_{j(reg)}) + [ (β_{1} + v_{j}+ h_{j(reg)}) ×
AOD_{ij}] + β_{2}Elevation +β_{3}NDVI +β_{4}WS + β_{5}Urban +
β_{6}Log(RoadDensity) + β_{7}PBL + β_{8}Humidity + β_{9}
DistanceEmission + β_{10}WS*PBL +β_{11}Log(RoadDensity)*PBL+β_{12}
AOD^{2}+ε_{ij}/ (2) /(u_{j}v_{j} ) ~ [(o o), Σ_{β} ]/

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  /(g_{j (reg)}h_{j (reg)} ) ~ [(o o), Σ_{reg} ]/
#+END_QUOTE

where /PM_{ij}/ is the PM_{2.5} concentration at a spatial site /i/ on
day /j/; /AOD_{ij}/ is the AOD value in the grid cell corresponding to
site /i/ on day /j/; /α/ and /u_{j}/ are the fixed and random
intercepts, respectively; /β_{1}/and/v_{j}/ are the fixed and random
slopes, respectively; /Wind speed (WS), Humidity, PBL (Planetary
Boundary Layer)/ are the values in the grid cells corresponding to site
i on a day j. /Elevation/, /road density (RoadDensity), distance to
emission sources (DistanceEmission), percent of urban space (Urban/) are
the values in grid cells corresponding to site i. /g_{j(reg)} and
h_{j(reg)}/ are the daily random intercepts and AOD slopes specific to
each study area region. /ε_{ij} ~N(0, σ^{2})/ is the error term at site
i on a day j and /Σ_{β}/ is the variance-covariance matrix for the
random effects. The AOD fixed effect in the model (Eq.2) accounts for
the effect of AOD on PM_{2.5}, which was the same for all study days.
The AOD random effects explain the daily variability in the PM_{2.5}-AOD
relationship. Since height of the boundary layer may vary with wind
speed (Oke 1987), influencing the concentration and vertical profile of
pollutants, both terms were included as interaction terms. For example,
boundary layer not only controls transport and location of pollutants
and aerosols but also their concentrations would be different in
variable boundary layer structures (Angevine et al., 2013). The solution
of the mixed model equations is maximum likelihood, a form of estimation
that accounts for the parameters in the fixed-effects structure of the
model to reduce the bias in the covariance parameter estimates
(Lindstrom and Bates 1988; Laird et al. 1982). Currently, this method is
implemented in the SAS (Statistical Analysis System) statistical
software package version 9.3 (proc mixed).

In addition, we incorporated inverse probability weighting (IPW) to
potentially avoid bias in the regression coefficient estimates and thus
in the resulting predictions. This approach effectively up-weights dates
and grid cells which are under-represented due to missing data, as
described in Kloog et al., 2012.Finally, PM_{2.5} concentrations for
each grid cell on a day j were estimated using the corresponding AOD
values where the fixed and random intercepts, the fixed and random
slopes for each study day and for each region were derived from Eq. (2).

Importantly, in this study we compared the full model above with reduced
models to ascertain the benefits of increasing complexity. The models
examined were: 1) AOD only model;2) AOD+MET model; 3) AOD + LU model;
and 4) AOD+LU+MET.

*2.6 Model validation*

We use a cross-validation (CV) approach to evaluate the ability of the
model to predict PM_{2.5} concentrations for each pixel in the study
area. Thus, the dataset was repeatedly randomly divided into 90%
(calibration) and 10% (held-out test) splits. We applied the fitted
calibration model to estimate PM_{2.5} for the held-out test set. This
“out-of-sample” process was repeated ten times to calculate the
cross-validated (CV) R^{2} values. Subsequently, the predicted PM_{2.5}
concentrations were compared to those measured at each site. Overall
temporal R^{2} was calculated by regressing Δ PM against Δ predicted
where: Δ PM is the difference between the observed PM_{2.5} at a given
site on a given day and the annual mean PM_{2.5} at that location, and Δ
predicted is defined similarly for the predicted values generated from
the model. Overall spatial R^{2} was calculated by regressing the annual
mean PM_{2.5} at a given site against the annual mean predicted PM_{2.5}
at that location.

*2.7 Estimation of PM_{2.5} levels in the study domain and their spatial
variability*

We examined spatial PM_{2.5} patterns in New England using the mixed
effects models described above. We focus here on five days based on the
MAIAC AOD retrieval from Aqua in 2003: (i) a medium to high pollution
event (regional source of pollution): June 25, and (ii) low pollution
events (local sources): April 25, May 19, July 31 and November 15. We
focus in more detail on the June 25^{th} and November 15^{th} data to
analyze the consistency and quality of the high-resolution AOD
retrievals. In particular, it is known that the MODIS dark target
algorithm (Levy et al., 2007) has a bias over brighter urban surfaces
(e.g., Munchaket al., 2013), and this comparison has been performed to
assure that MAIAC algorithm has reduced this error.

*3 Results *

*3.1 PM_{2.5} prediction based on a mixed-effects model*

Using the entire data set, estimates of PM_{2.5} concentrations were
obtained for 196 days (e.g. days with available AOD vs PM_{2.5} pairs)
during 2003. The retrieval rate is lower for higher numbers of AOD vs
PM_{2.5} pairs: there were 95 days with at least five pairs and 44 days
with at least 10 pairs. Note that during the same period of observations
but using the conventional 10 km AOD retrieval (DT) for the entire data
set there were 177 days available (Kloog et al., 2011).

The fixed effects of the AOD intercept and slope were statistically
significant: α=8.91 (p<0.0001); and β_{1}=16.20 (p<0.0001),
respectively. The fixed effects of spatial and temporal predictors were
also significant. In addition, the random slopes for AOD by day, and by
day and region were both significant (p<0.0001). Figure 2 shows the
daily variation of random AOD intercepts and slopes. Note that these
results (significant random effects) support the hypothesis that because
the parameters influencing the relationship between PM_{2.5} and AOD
vary from day to day within a given domain, it is necessary to adjust
for this daily variability. Table 1 presents modeled and cross-validated
R^{2} for 2003 for four different models: the AOD model, AOD+MET model,
AOD + LU model and our final model: AOD+LU+MET. As can be seen, adding
the LU terms to the AOD model significantly improves the spatial R^{2},
and the full model, incorporating LU and MET, improves it further. In
contrast, the AOD model is sufficient to well characterize the temporal
variation. The final CV R^{2} resulted in an R^{2} value of 0.88 with a
spatial R^{2} of 0.80. In addition, if we regress the out of sample
measured PM_{2.5} against the predicted we get a measure of bias in the
relationship. We obtained a slope of 0.99, and intercept of 0.01,
indicating a very low (or negligible) bias in the prediction model.
Furthermore, the increase in spatial R^{2} (from R^{2}=0.58 when the
main explanatory variable was AOD to R^{2}=0.80 when all parameters were
incorporated in a model) is of special importance since spatial
variation is essential for chronic exposures studies. We can contrast
this to previous results of Kloog et al (2011), with overall
cross-validated R^{2} of 0.83 in New England, with a spatial R^{2} of
0.78 and a temporal R^{2} of 0.84 when using 10 km AOD. Hence use of the
MAIAC data improves overall, temporal, and spatial R^{2}.

Figure 3 shows the seasonal mean residuals per EPA site. As can be seen,
there is a high prediction accuracy for most of sites and for all
seasons, with the mean yearly residual value of 1.71 μg/m^{3} (standard
deviation of the mean=1.20 μg/m^{3}). The fall season shows the lowest
mean residual value of 1.27 μg/m^{3} (stdev=1.12 μg/m^{3}) whereas the
winter has the highest mean of 2.48μg/m^{3} (stdev=2.21 μg/m^{3}). This
is due to the higher AOD retrieval error during winter (undetected
residual snow) and lower AOD retrieval rate. Note that one site (EPA
code 33-007-4002) located in the forest on a state highway was excluded
from our analyses (denoted as 1, Figure 3), since it had the highest
average residual compared to other sites. There were only a limited
number of PM_{2.5} measurements which differed significantly from those
observed at the nearby sites. Located on the east of Mount Washington,
we also assume that the nearby upwind peaks affect this site when the
wind is from the prevailing wind direction. 

*3.2 Spatial variability in PM_{2.5} levels during moderate and low
pollution events.*

We compare the spatial variability in PM_{2.5} levels using the AOD
model (panel A, Fig. 4) and AOD+LU+MET model (panel B, Fig. 4) during
the moderate pollution day on June 25. Generally, both models show
similar spatial pattern. Importantly, this pattern of pollution
transport can only be captured by using satellite AOD retrievals and
cannot be estimated solely based on LU and MET parameters. Furthermore,
both models exhibit variability in PM_{2.5} concentrations across the
domain. However, this variability is much larger when using the
AOD+LU+MET model. For example, consider the variability in
PM_{2.5}concentrations inside of areas marked 1 and 2. The AOD+LU+MET
model shows not only higher variations per unit area but also higher
predicted concentrations of PM_{2.5} along the highway (Route 495, area
2). This area corresponds to the Merrimack River Valley, so elevation
may be a factor as well as industrial development along the river. The
lower left part of it corresponds to the historically industrial city of
Lawrence whereas to the west, elevated PM_{2.5} concentrations
correspond to the industrial city of Lowell. Importantly, the area
marked 1 in the figures shows uniformly high concentrations in the AOD
model, but a more mixed pattern, with pockets of lower concentrations
and a few places with even higher concentrations in the AOD+LU+MET
model.

What governs spatial variability in PM_{2.5} levels during low pollution
day? To answer this question in Figure 5 we show several days generated
by AOD+LU+MET model: April 25, May, 19 and July, 31. For all, PM_{2.5}
concentrations differ by date and location. As expected, highly
populated areas such as Bridgeport, New Haven, Hartford, Boston,
Springfield and Providence exhibited higher PM_{2.5} levels, compared to
rural areas of Vermont and southwestern New Hampshire. Furthermore, grid
cells along major highways (e.g., Interstate Highways 91 and 95) tend to
have higher PM_{2.5} concentrations, perhaps because these cells are
more impacted by traffic and are also densely populated. On May 19,
urban areas (Providence, Boston, and New Haven), roads, and the area
along the coast line (CT) exhibited higher PM_{2.5} concentrations.
Furthermore, there is a higher variability in PM_{2.5} concentrations
between urban and rural locations. Note however, that for all days
central Boston appears to have variability in PM_{2.5} levels.

To rule out algorithm biases with surface brightness, we present an
additional AOD map of a clear day acquired on November 15, 2003 (Fig. 6,
panel A). As can be seen, the MAIAC retrieval is free from this artifact
of processing above urban areas. This day also served as an example of
the most extreme difference in PM_{2.5} spatial pattern using AOD (Fig.
6, panel B) models and AOD+LU+MET (Fig. 6, panel C) on low pollution
day. Not surprisingly, using AOD model, the spatial pattern of PM_{2.5}
concentrations follows AOD retrievals. Furthermore, the variability in
PM_{2.5} concentrations between different locations on this day is 1.5
μg/m^{3}. Importantly, as can be seen from Figure 6 (B), the AOD model
is prone to overestimate PM_{2.5}concentrations in areas adjacent to
clouds. This may represent a residual noise from cloud-contaminated
pixels as well as a real physical signal, for example, presence of
elevated hydrated aerosols in the vicinity of cloud which is not taken
into account by LU and MET ancillary information. When a AOD+LU+MET
model was run, urban areas and roads appears to be more polluted than
surrounding non-urban areas, with the highest difference in PM_{2.5}
concentration levels of 4.5 μg/m^{3}for the entire domain and between
different urban settings, or three times the variation of the AOD model.
The results of the AOD+LU+MET model were supported by ground EPA
measurements: the seven sites that were available on that day measured
PM_{2.5} concentrations ranging from 2.3-8.9 mg/m^{3}, with a difference
of 6.6 μg/m^{3}.

Finally, in Figure 7 we compared annual mean measured and predicted
PM_{2.5} concentrations using AOD and AOD+LU+METmodels for all sites
located along major highways (I91, I93 and I95).Generally, the
AOD+LU+MET model generates better accuracy (R^{2}=0.82) for those sites
than the AOD model (R^{2}=0.61). Using the AOD model we tend to
underestimate the PM_{2.5} levels from road pollution.

*3.3 Model accuracy at the city scale*

High resolution AOD may provide information about local conditions and
intra-urban variability, at scales below 10km. With this in mind, we
analyzed the accuracy of our model inside the greater Boston area and
New Haven (each city contains five ground monitoring sites) to examine
performance within cities. Figure 8 shows that using the AOD+LU+MET
model there is a good agreement between measured and predicted PM_{2.5}
concentrations for both locations. As can be seen, the model and
cross-validated R^{2} are high for both cities indicating a good
agreement between the measured and predicted concentrations.
Furthermore, cross-sectional comparison between the mean measured and
mean predicted PM_{2.5} concentrations for each site over the study
period for Boston and New Haven R^{2} are 0.80 and 0.87 respectively
(data not shown). This comparison is especially important for
determining whether model predictions are suitable assessments for
epidemiological studies, which require accurate estimation of spatial
patterns. This improvement can be related to the improved MAIAC accuracy
over bright/urban areas that has a direct impact on the model accuracy.

*4. Discussion*

In this paper we use the new high-resolution (1 km) AOD retrieval from
MODIS data based on MAIAC algorithm to predict PM_{2.5} concentrations
within the New England area of the United States. The main goal was to
study if the high resolution AOD can improve our ability to distinguish
qualitatively and quantitatively spatial patterns of PM_{2.5} levels.
Toward this end we developed mixed effects model, similar to our
previous studies, to explore the advantages of high resolution data set.
Importantly, we have shown that PM_{2.5} prediction accuracy improves
further by adding meteorological and land use parameters. We have
demonstrated that high resolution remote sensing data can supply
critical information in our efforts to obtain accurate exposure
estimates for future health effects and risk assessment studies.
Moreover, we have shown that using the MAIAC data we obtain better
predictive power than with the DT data, temporally, spatially, and
overall. While an overall improvement in R^{2} of 3% explained may seem
modest, we were starting from a high baseline (83% explained) and this
represents 17% of the remaining unexplained variance in concentration.
Moreover we have shown that this model specifically better captures the
effects of urban highways, and high frequency spatial variability.

From the epidemiological and exposure assessment point of view, it is of
high importance to have information about the spatial variability of the
exposures in the city. In a previous study Kumar et al., 2011 employed
the same DT algorithm to retrieve the 2- and 5-km AOD resolutions, which
were used to predict PM_{2.5} concentrations. The authors reported that
their model was less accurate in urban locations than the suburban ones.
In contrast, our study showed high accuracy in selected urban locations
(Boston and New Haven) thereby indicating that our model based on MAIAC
data can be used to investigate the intra-urban exposure contrasts in
PM_{2.5} levels. Furthermore, Kloog and colleagues 2013 employed a
similar model for the Mid-Atlantic region but using the coarser DT
retrieval. While overall model fit was good (cross validated R^{2} of
0.81) the authors reported occasional low PM_{2.5} concentrations around
the major Mid-Atlantic Highway (the I-95) presumably because the
relatively coarse 10 ×10 km^{2} grid cell for AOD that cannot always
capture the concentration gradients near line or point sources. Our
study clearly shows that the final constructed model capture the
pollution levels along highways and many other urban locations.
Importantly, these high concentrations are not artifacts of retrieval,
thereby extending our ability to investigate the spatial patterns of
urban particulate pollution, such as examining exposures in areas with
high traffic. The direct implementation of our results will result in
more accurate accounting for the magnitude of the association between
PM_{2.5} and health outcomes. Finally, additional parameter that should
be considered in the future modeling of PM_{2.5} is traffic counts from
National Transportation Atlas 2011. Unfortunately, this data was
unavailable for 2003.

Although the 1 km resolution is still far from optimal, it offers a
clear advantage over the 10 km and even 3 km AOD data in urban studies.
First, the improved resolution is expected to not only reduce the
exposure error but also generally result in larger health effects
estimates. For example, fine-scale variations in PM_{2.5} have been
shown to associate with larger health effects than those that vary
regionally (Jerrett et al. 2005; 2009), suggesting the potential
importance of refining exposure predictions. However, it should be also
noted that recently-developed statistical approaches use the land use
information to get within grid spatial variation at finer than 1 km
scales (Beckerman et al., 2013; Vienneau et al., 2013; Sampson et al.,
2013) which is potentially a complimentary approach to what has been
done in our study.

Despite promising results, more data need to be pre-processed and
analyzed. First, our model was developed for AOD retrieval days/pixels
and the next study should expand previously developed methodology
described in Kloog et al., 2011 aimed to assess PM_{2.5} concentrations
on non-retrieval days. Furthermore, to further investigate the strengths
and limitations of high resolution AOD data for modeling PM_{2.5}
concentrations we are planning a comprehensive multi-year study based on
the full set of MODIS measurements. Next, further improve­ments to the
MAIAC AOD retrieval algorithm would improve accuracy in PM_{2.5}
estimation. For example, lack of vertical information highlights the
importance of combining the satellite image with vertical profiles, like
LIDARs. It should be noted also that this approach requires a large
amount of daily PM_{2.5} stations, which are not always available in any
given region. Therefore, the developed model would not be directly
transferable for areas without sufficient PM_{2.5} monitors, such as
Africa or Latin America.

*Acknowledgments:*

This work was made possible by USEPA grant RD 83479801. Its contents are
solely the responsibility of the grantee and do not necessarily
represent the official views of the USEPA. Further, USEPA does not
endorse the purchase of any commercial products or services mentioned in
the publication. The support for A. Lyapustin and Y. Wang is provided by
the NASA Terra and Aqua Science Program.

*References*

Altaratz, O., Bar-Or, R., Wollner, U., and Koren, I.
[[http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/8/3/034025][Relative humidity and
its effect on aerosol optical depth in the vicinity of convective
clouds]], Environ. Res. Lett. 8 (2013), 034025
[[http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/034025][doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/034025]],

Beckerman, B.S., Jerrett, M., Serre, M., Martin, R.V., Lee, S.-J., Van
Donkelaar, A., Ross, Z., Su, J., Burnett, R.T.
[[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/record/display.url?eid=2-s2.0-84880112020&origin=reflist&sort=plf-f&cite=2-s2.0-84880112020&src=s&imp=t&sid=AD128FF83D3D881D9A0277A224E01D38.Vdktg6RVtMfaQJ4pNTCQ%3a1080&sot=cite&sdt=a&sl=0][A
hybrid approach to estimating national scale spatiotemporal variability
of PM2.5 in the contiguous United States]], Environ Science and
Technol, 47 (13),  (2013), pp. 7233-7241.doi: 10.1021/es400039u

[[http://www.sciencedirect.com.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/science/article/pii/S1352231007006735#bib3][Benson,
P.E. 1984]]. CALINE4-A Dispersion Model for Prediction Air Pollutant
Concentrations Near Roadways. California Department of Transportation,
Sacramento, CA (1984).

[[http://www.sciencedirect.com.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/science/article/pii/S1352231007006735#bib4][Benson,
P.E. 1992]]. A Review of the Development and Application of the CALINE3
and CALINE4 Models. Atmospheric Environment, 26B (3) (1992), p.
379--390.

Bergin, M. H., et al., 2000. Comparison of aerosol optical depth
inferred from surface measurements with that determined by sunphotometer
for cloud-free conditions at a continental U.S. site,J. Geophys.
Res.,105, (2000), p.6807--6816.

Chudnovsky, A., Lee, H-J., Kostinski, A., Kotlov, T., and Koutrakis, P.:
Prediction of daily fine particulate matter concentrations using aerosol
optical depth retrievals from the Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellite. J. Air Waste Manage., 62(9), (2012),
p.1022-1031,doi:
[[http://sfx.hul.harvard.edu/sfx_local?__char_set=utf8&id=doi:10.1080/10962247.2012.695321&sid=libx%3Ahul.harvard&genre=article][10.1080/10962247.2012.695321]].

Chudnovsky, A., Kostinski, A., Lyapustin, A., and Koutrakis, P.: Spatial
scales of pollution from variable resolution satellite imaging. Environ.
Pollut., 172, (2013a), p.131-138.

Chudnovsky, A., Tang, C., Lyapustin, A., Wang, Y., Schwartz, J., and
Koutrakis, P.: A critical assessment of high-resolution aerosol optical
depth retrievals for fine particulate matter predictions, Atmos. Chem.
Phys., 13, (2013b), p.10907-10917, doi:10.5194/acp-13-10907-2013.

Dockery DW, Pope CA, Xu X, Spengler JD, Ware JH, Fay ME, Ferris
BG,Speizer FE. An association between air pollution and mortality in six
UScities. N Engl J Med, 29 (1993), p. 1753--1759.

Dominici F, Peng RD, Bell ML, Pham L, McDermott A, Zeger S, et al. Fine
particulate air pollution and hospital admission for cardiovascular and
respiratory diseases. JAMA 295, (2006), p.1127--1134.

Hoek, G.; Beelen, R.; de Hoogh, K.; Vienneau, D.; Gulliver, J.;Fischer,
P.; Briggs, D. A review of land-use regression models to assess spatial
variation of outdoor air pollution. Atmos. Environ. 42 ,2008, p.7561
−7578.

Hoff RM, and Christopher SA. Remote Sensing of Particulate Pollution
from Space: Have We Reached the Promised Land?J Air Waste Manage Assoc
59(6), (2009), p.645-675.

Jensen, John R., 2006, RemoteSensing of theEnvironment:
AnEarthResourcePerspective(2nd edition), Prentice Hall:
UpperSaddleRiver, NJ, 608 pages.

Jerrett, M.; Arain, A.; Kanaroglou, P.; Beckerman, B.; Potoglou,
D.;Sahsuvaroglu, T.; Morrison, J.; Giovis, C. A review and evaluation of
intraurban air pollution exposure models. J. Expo.
Anal.Environ.Epidemiol, 15, (2005), p.185 −204.

Jerrett M, Burnett RT, Pope CA 3rd, Ito K, Thurston G, Krewski D, Shi Y,
Calle E, Thun M.

[[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19279340][Long-term ozone exposure
and mortality.]] N Engl J Med. 2009 Mar 12;360(11):1085-95. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa0803894.

Kloog, I., Koutrakis, P., Coull, B., Lee, H.,and Schwartz, J.: Assessing
temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological
studies using satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos.
Environ., 45(35), (2011), p.6267-6275.

Kloog I, Nordio F, Coull BA, Schwartz J. 2012. Incorporating local land
use regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model of
spatiotemporal PM(2.5) exposures in theMid-Atlanticstates. Environ Sci
Technol. 2012 Nov 6;46(21):11913-21. doi: 10.1021/es302673e.

Kumar, N., A. Foster, A. Chu, T. Peters, and Willis, R.:
SatelliteRemoteSensingforDeveloping Time-Space Resolved Estimates of
AmbientParticulate in Cleveland, OH. AerosSciTechnol., 45(9), 1090-1108,
DOI:
[[http://sfx.hul.harvard.edu/hvd?__char_set=utf8&id=doi:10.1080/02786826.2011.581256&sid=libx%3Ahul.harvard&genre=article][10.1080/02786826.2011.581256]],
2011.

Laird, Nan M.; Ware, James H. 1982.Random-EffectsModelsfor Longitudinal
Data. Biometrics (International BiometricSociety) 38 (4): 963--974.
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier][doi]]:[[http://dx.doi.org/10.2307%2F2529876][10.2307/2529876]].
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSTOR][JSTOR]] [[http://www.jstor.org/stable/2529876][2529876]].

Lee, H.J., Liu, Y., Coull, B.A., Schwartz, J.,andKoutrakis, P.:A novel
calibration approach of MODIS AOD data to predict PM2.5 concentrations,
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 7991-8002, 2011.

[[mailto:Robert.C.Levy@nasa.gov][Levy, R.,
]][[mailto:Shana.Mattoo-1@nasa.gov][S. Mattoo,
]][[mailto:Leigh.Munchak@gmail.com][L.A. Munchak,
]][[mailto:laremer@hotmail.com][L.A. Remer,
]][[mailto:Andrew.Sayer@nasa.gov][A.M. Sayer, ]]and
[[mailto:Christina.Hsu@nasa.gov][N. Hsu]].The Collection 6 MODIS Aerosol
Products over Land and Ocean.Atmos. Meas. Tech. Disc., (Submitted) (6),
159-259, 2013.

Lindstrom, ML; Bates, DM. 1988. "Newton-Raphson and EM algorithmsfor
linear mixed-effectsmodelsforrepeated-measures data". JASA 83 (404):
1014-1021.

Liu, Y.; Paciorek, C. J.; Koutrakis, P. Estimating regional spatialand
temporal variability of PM2.5 concentrations using satellite
data,meteorology, and land use information. Environ Health Perspect,
117, (2009), p.886−892.

Lyapustin A, Martonchik J. Wang Y, LaszloI, Korkin S. 2011a. Multi-Angle
Implementation of Atmospheric Correction (MAIAC): Part 1. Radiative
Transfer Basis and Look-Up Tables, J. Geophys. Res., 116, D03210,
doi:10.1029/2010JD014985.

LyapustinA, Wang Y, LaszloI, KahnR, KorkinS, RemerL, LevyR, and Reid JS.
2011b. Multi-Angle Implementation of Atmospheric Correction (MAIAC):
Part 2. Aerosol Algorithm, J. Geophys. Res., 116, D03211,
doi:10.1029/2010JD014986.

Maune, D. F. (Ed.) (2007). Digital elevation model technologies and
applications: The DEM users manual, 2nd edition. Bethesda, MD: American
Society for Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, p.550.

Monks P, Simpson D., et al. 2009. Atmospheric composition change -
global and regional air quality, Atmos Environ 43, (2009), p.5268-5350.

Munchak, L. A., Levy, R. C., Mattoo, S., Remer, L. A., Holben, B. N.,
Schafer, J. S., Hostetler, C. A., and Ferrare, R. A.: MODIS 3 km aerosol
product: applications over land in an urban/suburban region, Atmos.
Meas. Tech., 6, p.1747-1759, doi:10.5194/amt-61747-2013, 2013.

Oke T.R. Boundary Layer Climates, 2nd edn., 435 p. London: Methuen
(1987).

Pope A III, Burnett R,Thun M, Calle E, Krewski D, Ito K, Thurston G.
2002. Lung Cancer, Cardiopulmonary Mortality and Long-term Exposure to
Fine Particulate Air Pollution.J Am Med Assoc287, p.1132-1141.

[[mailto:laremer@hotmail.com][Remer, L.,
]][[mailto:Shana.Mattoo-1@nasa.gov][S. Mattoo,
]][[mailto:Robert.C.Levy@nasa.gov][R.C. Levy, ]]and
[[mailto:Leigh.Munchak@gmail.com][L. Munchak]]. MODIS 3km Aerosol
Product: Algorithm and Global Perspective. Atmos. Meas. Tech. Disc., (In
Press)(6), p.69-112.\\
[[http://qb3vf9cp4a.search.serialssolutions.com/?SS_LibHash=qb3vf9cp4a&genre=article&sid=sersol%3AuniqueIDQuery&id=doi:10.5194/amtd-6-69-2013][doi:10.5194/amtd-6-69-2013]],
2013.

Samet JM, Zeger SL, Dominici F, Curriero F, Coursac I, Dockery DW, et
al. 2000. The national morbidity, mortality, and air pollution study,
part II: morbidity and mortality from air pollution in the United
States. Cambridge: Health Effects Institute, June.

Schwartz, J.(1994) What are people dying of on high air pollution days?
Environ. Res. 64, p.26-35.

Schwartz, J., Dockery, D.W., Neas, LM. (1996). Is daily mortality
associated specifically with fine particles? J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc.
46, p.2-14.

Su GJ, Jerrett M, Beckerman B. A distance-decay variable selection
strategy for land use regression modeling of ambient air pollution
exposures. Science of the Total Environment. 2009a;407:3890--3898.

Tucker,C.J.,1979:Redandphotographicinfraredlinearcombinationsformonitoringvegetation.
RemoteSens.Environ., 8, p.127--150.

Tucker, C.J.,
andP.J.Sellers,1986:Satelliteremotesensingofprimaryproduction.
Int.J.RemoteSens., 7, p.1395--1416.

U.S. EPA 2004.Air Quality Criteria for Particulate
Matter.EPA/600/P-99/002aF-bF. Research Triangle Park, NC:U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency Office of Research and Development.

vanDonkelaar A, Martin RV, Brauer M, Kahn R, Levy R, Verduzco C,
Villeneuve P. Global Estimates of Exposure to Fine Particulate Matter
from Satellite-based Aerosol Optical Depth.
[[http://ehp03.niehs.nih.gov/article/info:doi/10.1289/ehp.0901623][Environmental
Health Perspectives. 2010;118(6), p.847-55.]]

[[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=16302849000&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][Vienneau,
D.]]
[[mailto:danielle.vienneau@unibas.ch][ ]], [[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=16205025600&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][De
Hoogh,
K.]], [[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=37561110700&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][Bechle,
M.J.]], [[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=15829316600&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][Beelen,
R.]], [[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=15926418500&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][Van
Donkelaar,
A.]], [[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=7501381728&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][Martin,
.V.]], [[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=7003644552&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][Millet,
D.B.]], [[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=7004818581&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][Hoek,
G.]], [[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/authid/detail.url?authorId=7404860039&amp;eid=2-s2.0-84889853426][Marshall,
J.D.]]   Western European land use regression incorporating satellite-
and ground-based measurements of NO2 and PM10.
[[http://www.scopus.com.scopeesprx.elsevier.com/source/sourceInfo.url?sourceId=21537&origin=recordpage][Environmental
Science and Technology]] 47 (23), (2013), pp. 13555-13564.
