*Materials and Methods*

/Satellite AOD Data. /

Daily spectral AOD data was obtained from the Moderate Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on the Aqua satellite for the year
2003. Further details about MODIS satellite aerosol data retrieval and
validation have been published previously.(Remer et al. 2005; Levy et
al. 2007. A new algorithm MAIAC (Lyapustin et al. 2011)

Lyapustin, Alexei, et al. "Multiangle implementation of atmospheric
correction (MAIAC): 1. Radiative transfer basis and look‐up tables."
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres (1984--2012) 116.D3 (2011).

has been developed to process MODIS data. MAIAC retrieves aerosol
parameters over land at 1 km resolution simultaneously with parameters
of a surface bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF).
This is accomplished by using the time series of MODIS measurements and
simultaneous processing of groups of pixels. The MAIAC algorithm ensures
that the number of measurements exceeds the number of unknowns, a
necessary condition for solving an inverse problem without empirical
assumptions typically used by current operational algorithms. The MODIS
time series accumulation also provides multi-angle coverage for every
surface grid cell, which is required for the BRDF retrievals from MODIS
data. The improved accuracy of MAIAC results from using the explicit
surface characterization method in contrast to the empirical surface
parameterization approach, which is utilized in the MYD04 algorithm.
Further, MAIAC incorporates a cloud mask (CM) algorithm based on
spatio-temporal analysis which augments traditional pixel-level cloud
detection techniques.

Daily values of AOD were assigned to the grid cell where the AOD
retrieval centroid was located.

One feature of the AOD data is that some of the grid-specific AOD values
are missing on some days due to cloud cover or snow cover(Kloog et al.
2011). Thus, the spatial coverage of the AOD data varies considerably by
day.

/Air Pollution Monitors. /

Data for daily PM_{2.5} mass concentrations across New England (see
Figure 1) for the year 2003 were obtained from the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) Air Quality System (AQS) database as well as the
IMPROVE (Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments)
network. IMPROVE monitor sites are located in national parks and
wilderness areas while EPA monitoring sites are located across New
England including urban areas such as downtown Boston. There were 71
monitors with unique locations operating in New England during the study
period.

/Spatial and Temporal Covariates. /

Spatial covariates included major roads, point emissions and area
emissions.

Data on the density of major roads was based on A1 roads (hard surface
highways including Interstate and U.S. numbered highways, primary State
routes, and all controlled access highways) data obtained through the US
census 2000 topologically integrated geographic encoding and referencing
system. Because the distributions of major roads were highly
right-skewed, they were log transformed.

Temporal covariates included wind speed, humidity, visibility, height of
the planetary boundary layer. All meteorological variables (temperature,
wind speed, humidity, visibility) were obtained through the national
climatic data center (NCDC). height of the planetary boundary layer data
was obtained from the North American Regional Reanalysis (NARR). Further
details on spatial and temporal covariates are given in Kloog et al.
2011 and Kloog et al. 2012.

/Calibration of AOD. /

A description of the method used to calibrate the AOD values to
represent PM_{2.5} concentrations is given in Kloog et al. 2011 and
Kloog et al. 2012. Briefly, the relationship between PM_{2.5} and AOD at
the monitoring sites was modeled using a mixed-effects regression model
where PM_{2.5} was the dependent variable and AOD was the main
explanatory predictor. The model included spatial covariates for major
roads, point emissions and area emissions, and temporal covariates for
wind speed, visibility, height of the planetary boundary layer, with
interactions between AOD and random intercepts for each day.

Kloog et al. 2011 also includes a third stage of modeling which imputes
PM_{2.5} at the missing AOD locations. In this study, we restricted to
only days with ample AOD present to leverage the observed spatial
variability in the data and minimize the use of known land-use
regression models.

/Simulation setup. /

A simulation study was conducted to assess the performance of kriging
and land use regression methods on a realistic representation of an air
pollution surface. Separate simulation studies were conducted to
consider studies of chronic health effects due to long-term air
pollution exposures and acute health effects due to short-term air
pollution exposures.

We considered two types of health effect models: a binary health outcome
and a continuous health outcome. A linear regression health model was
assumed for the continuous health outcome, where the outcome depends
linearly on the exposure. For the binary health outcome, a logistic
regression health model was assumed, where the outcome depends linearly
on the exposure through a logit link function. No other confounding
variables were included in the health model. We explored exposure models
with four different covariance models (Matern function with different
levels of smoothness, indexed by κ). We also contrasted two settings for
the number of monitors where /m=100/ is the realistic setting (although
still higher than the actual number of monitors in this region during
the study period), and /m=500/ to represent a unrealistic ``best case
scenario'' with much more spatial coverage to help highlight the
problems due to sample size vs the problems due to model
misspecification.

We restricted our simulation studies to the 32 days such that at least
50,000 grid-cells of AOD data were available from the satellite.

/Chronic Effects Simulation. /

To emulate the setting of a health study of the chronic effects of
particulate matter, we generated a chronic exposure surface by averaging
the calibrated PM_{2.5} data at each grid-cell over the 32 days of
exposure. In this scenario, all subjects' exposures were sampled from
this one common exposure surface. Thus, the spatial variability of the
surface provided the only variability in the exposures of different
subjects.

For each simulation, we generated 500 subjects' exposure and outcome
measurements. To assign the exposure, we first generated each subjects'
residential location by population density. Population density sampling
was approximated by using the geocoded locations of births during 2003
from a previous study.(Kloog et al. 2012) We then assigned the
corresponding calibrated PM_{2.5} value at the subjects' residential
location as the exposure. The health outcome was generated to depend on
the assigned exposure using the chosen health model type with no
confounders. The monitor locations were chosen by a random uniform
distribution across the exposure surface, and the corresponding
calibrated PM2.5 value at the monitor location was used as the observed
exposure. Using the measured exposure at the monitor locations, the
kriging or land use model was fit to the data and chronic exposure
predictions were generated at the residential locations of the subjects.
The predicted exposures were then fit to the health outcomes to estimate
the association.

/Acute Effects Simulation./

We designed our acute effects simulation to mimic the setting of a
health study of the short-term effects of particulate matter. Using the
32 days of calibrated PM_{2.5}, we considered the exposure period of
interest to be one day of PM_{2.5} exposure. For each simulation, we
generated 1,000 subjects' residential location by randomly sampling the
day of the exposure and then sampling the health locations by population
density, as in the chronic simulation. Once the date and grid-cell were
randomly chosen, we assigned the corresponding calibrated PM_{2.5}
exposure at the grid-cell. The health outcomes were generated to depend
on the assigned exposure using the chosen health model type with no
confounders. We simulated 1000 subjects per simulation so that there
were approximately 30 subjects sampled from each of the 32 days. The
monitor locations were chosen by a random uniform distribution across
the exposure surface, and the corresponding daily calibrated PM_{2.5}
value at the monitor location was used as the observed exposure for each
day. Using the measured exposure at the monitor locations, the kriging
or land use model was fit to the data by day and exposure predictions
were generated for each day at the residential locations of the
subjects. The predicted exposures were then fit to the health outcomes
to estimate the association.
