*Prenatal Particulate Air Pollution and Neurodevelopment in Urban
Children: *

*Identifying Sensitive Windows and Sex Differences*

Yueh-Hsiu Mathilda Chiu, ScD^{1}; Hsiao-Hsien Leon Hsu, ScD^{2}; Brent
A. Coull, PhD^{3,4};

David C. Bellinger, PhD, MSc^{4,5}; Itai Kloog, PhD^{6}; Joel Schwartz,
PhD^{4,7};

Robert O. Wright, MD, MPH^{2,8}; Rosalind J. Wright, MD, MPH^{1,8}

^{1} Department of Pediatrics, Kravis Children's Hospital, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA

^{2} Department of Preventive Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA

^{3} Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA

^{4} Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA

^{5} Department of Neurology Research, Children's Hospital Boston,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

^{6} Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Israel

^{7} Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA

^{8} The Mindich Child Health & Development Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA

*Acknowledgements:* The Asthma Coalition on Community, Environment, and
Social Stress (ACCESS) project has been funded by grants R01 ES010932,
R01 ES013744, R01 ES21357, P30 ES023515, U01 HL072494, R01 HL080674, EPA
RD 83479801, P30 ES000002. The authors declare they have no competing
financial interests.

*Short Running Title:* Prenatal PM_{2.5}, sensitive windows &
neurodevelopment

*ABSTRACT *

*Background:* Brain growth and structural organization occurs in stages
beginning prenatally. Thus, toxins may impact neurodevelopment
differently dependent upon exposure timing.

*Objectives:* We implemented innovative methodology to identify
sensitive windows for the effects of prenatal fine particulate matter
exposure [diameter≤2.5μm (PM_{2.5})] on children's neurodevelopment.

*Methods:* We assessed 267 full-term (≥37 weeks) urban children's daily
PM_{2.5} exposure during pregnancy using a validated satellite-based
spatio-temporally resolved prediction model. Outcomes included attention
(commission errors [CEs], omission errors [OEs], hit reaction times
[HRTs] from the Conners' CPT-II), memory (e.g., the composite General
Memory [GM] Index and its components - Verbal [VEM] and Visual [VIM]
memory, and Attention-Concentration [AC] indices from the Wide Range
Assessment of Memory and Learning, 2nd Ed), and IQ (Wechsler
Intelligence Scale for Children-IV) assessed at age 6.5 ± 0.98 years. To
identify the role of exposure timing we used distributed lag regression
models to examine associations between weekly prenatal PM_{2.5} exposure
and neurodevelopment. Sex-specific effects were also examined.

*Results:* Mothers were primarily minorities (60% Hispanic, 25% black);
69% had ≤12 years of education. Adjusting for maternal age, education,
race, and smoking, we found associations between higher PM_{2.5} levels
at 20-26 weeks gestation with increased OEs, higher PM_{2.5} at 33-38
weeks with slower HRTs and higher PM_{2.5} at 32-38 weeks with lower IQ
among boys; significant associations were found in memory domains in
girls (higher PM_{2.5} exposure at 18-25 weeks was associated with
reduced VIM scores, greater PM_{2.5} exposure at 14-21 weeks was
associated with reduced GM scores).

*Conclusions:* Increased prenatal PM_{2.5} exposure at specific time
windows was associated with poorer function in several memory and
attention domains in these urban children with variable effects based on
sex. More definitive determination of time window-specific and
sex-specific effects may yield insight into underlying mechanisms and
vulnerable subgroups.

*INTRODUCTION*

Cognitive impairment and behavioral problems affect up to 20% of U.S.
children, placing a burden on education and healthcare systems
([[#_ENREF_8][Boulet et al. 2009]]; [[#_ENREF_14][Costello et al.
2003]]; [[#_ENREF_19][Froehlich et al. 2007]]; [[#_ENREF_31][Leonard and
Wen 2002]]; [[#_ENREF_34][Montes et al. 2012]]; [[#_ENREF_40][Perou et
al. 2013]]). Fewer than 25% of childhood neurodevelopmental disabilities
have an identifiable genetic or environmental cause, indicating the need
for additional research ([[#_ENREF_3][Bellinger 2007]]). Identifying the
role of environmental factors among the unknown causes will inform
strategies to modify risk. Moreover, as loss of early functioning may
result in diminished academic and economic productivity that persists
over the life span, understanding how maladaptive trajectories are set
in early life is a priority. Growing evidence implicates urban ambient
air pollution (e.g., traffic-related pollutants, particulate matter) as
a developmental neurotoxicant ([[#_ENREF_4][Block and
Calderon-Garciduenas 2009]]; [[#_ENREF_21][Genc et al. 2012]];
[[#_ENREF_32][Liu and Lewis 2014]]) with effects starting prenatally,
possibly via inflammatory processes that disrupt differentiation and
organization of the central nervous system (CNS). The fetal brain may be
particularly vulnerable due to its relatively immature immune and
inflammatory response systems ([[#_ENREF_4][Block and
Calderon-Garciduenas 2009]]; [[#_ENREF_5][Block et al. 2012]]).

The CNS develops sequentially with different anatomic regions forming at
different life stages and specific processes occurring in a timed
cascade. Subtle disturbances, even slight disruption in development at
an early stage may affect later developmental processes by offsetting
the normal trajectory ([[#_ENREF_55][Weiss 2000]]). Beginning /in
utero/, the brain must form a network of interconnected cells (i.e.
neurons) that stretch across different anatomic regions as well as
connecting to peripheral tissues ([[#_ENREF_30][Lavenex and Banta
Lavenex 2013]]; [[#_ENREF_52][Tau and Peterson 2010]]). The various
structural components of this network may be differentially vulnerable
to environmental toxins depending on the anatomic region of the brain
affected and the timing of exposure ([[#_ENREF_42][Rodier 2004]]). Also,
different network components are responsible for different functional
domains which are developing at different times (e.g., intelligence,
attention, memory); thus, an environmental neurotoxic agent may produce
impairment in variable functional domains depending on timing of
exposure. Identifying windows of susceptibility for neurotoxicants and
the domains being impacted may provide insight into underlying
mechanisms. For example, studies of lead exposure suggest enhanced
sensitivity around 2 years of age, a life stage that corresponds to when
synaptic pruning is most active ([[#_ENREF_9][Braun et al. 2012]];
[[#_ENREF_52][Tau and Peterson 2010]]). Mechanistically, lead has been
shown to induce inappropriate neurotransmitter release which impairs
neurotransmission, properties which drive the selection of synapses to
be pruned. By adding noise to synaptic pruning, lead disrupts synaptic
network organization ([[#_ENREF_11][Bressler et al. 1999]]). In
contrast, methylmercury which induces oxidative stress even at lower
exposure levels is most toxic in fetal life. The immature anti-oxidant
mechanisms of the fetus may explain its increased sensitivity to
methylmercury-induced oxidative stress and neuroinflammation
([[#_ENREF_50][Stringari et al. 2008]]).

/In utero/ neurotoxic effects of particulate air pollution and specific
prenatal windows of susceptibility associated with this exposure have
not been well elucidated. Animal, experimental, and epidemiological
studies demonstrate that air pollution effects on neurodevelopment begin
/in utero/ ([[#_ENREF_21][Genc et al. 2012]]; [[#_ENREF_59][Zanchi et
al. 2010]]). A few human studies have investigated associations between
prenatal air pollution and child neurodevelopment outcomes with varied
findings ([[#_ENREF_17][Edwards et al. 2010]]; [[#_ENREF_23][Guxens et
al. 2012]]; [[#_ENREF_24][Guxens et al. 2014]]; [[#_ENREF_28][Kim et al.
2014]]; [[#_ENREF_39][Perera et al. 2012]]; [[#_ENREF_53][Volk et al.
2011]]), which may be due in part to different approaches to exposure
assessment and arbitrary assignment of exposure timing rather than the
assessment of sensitive time windows of particular CNS developmental
relevance from the data. Specifically, these studies either assessed air
pollution in a specific clinically defined trimester or averaged
exposure over the entire pregnancy. Measuring exposure in the wrong
susceptibility window may lead to underestimated associations; yet, the
exact windows are often unknown.

Overlapping epidemiological research documents complex sex-specific
neurodevelopmental effects related to other chemicals (e.g., mercury,
lead, bisphenol A) ([[#_ENREF_10][Braun et al. 2011]];
[[#_ENREF_18][Engel et al. 2010]]; [[#_ENREF_25][Hamadani et al. 2011]];
[[#_ENREF_43][Sagiv et al. 2012]]; [[#_ENREF_51][Tatsuta et al. 2014]]).
Recent animal studies have suggested that there may be sex differences
in the association between prenatal air pollution and neurodevelopment
in the offspring ([[#_ENREF_6][Bolton et al. 2014]]; [[#_ENREF_15][Dada
et al. 2014]]). Like those seen with other chemical toxins, sex-specific
air pollution effects are likely to vary in relation to timing of
exposure and brain region affected although this has not been previously
studied.

To begin to address these gaps, we leveraged data on daily exposures to
particulate matter with a diameter ≤2.5 µm (PM_{2.5}) measured over
gestation, and applied advanced statistical methods [e.g., distributed
lag models (DLMs)] to more precisely identify the sensitive windows of
prenatal particulate air pollution exposure on a range of children's
neurodevelopmental outcomes (IQ, attention, and memory) in an ethnically
mixed lower-SES inner city population. We also examined effect
modification by sex. We hypothesized that the sensitive windows would
vary for the different neurodevelopmental domains and that there would
be sex-specific associations.

*METHODS*

Participants were from the Asthma Coalition on Community, Environment
and Social Stress (ACCESS) project, a pregnancy cohort originally funded
to recruit 500 mother-child pairs and designed to examine independent
and interactive effects of early life stress and physical toxins on
childhood respiratory health ([[#_ENREF_57][Wright et al. 2008]]). In
brief, English- or Spanish-speaking pregnant women (≥18 years old)
receiving care at Brigham & Women's Hospital (BWH), Boston Medical
Center (BMC), and affiliated community health centers were enrolled at
28.4 ± 7.9 weeks gestation between August 2002 and January 2007.
Research assistants approached women receiving prenatal care on select
clinic days, 78% of those approached who were eligible agreed to enroll.
There were no significant differences on race/ethnicity, education, and
income between women enrolled and those who declined; n=455 gave birth
to a live born infant and continued follow-up. Neurocognitive testing in
children was conducted between March 2012 to February 2014 during which
time n=310 families were re-contacted and agreed to participate. Among
these families, n=9 were unable to ultimately be scheduled despite an
average of 11 attempts, n=5 children were unable to adequately cooperate
with the testing protocol, n=28 were born pre-term (<37 weeks), and n=1
was /a priori/ excluded from analyses given an IQ score more than two
standard deviations below the mean, resulting in n=267 included in our
analysis. Characteristics of included (maternal age 26±5 years, 69% with
high school education or less, 25% black, 60% Hispanic, and 55% male)
versus excluded (maternal age 27±6 years, 62% with high school education
or less, 29% black, 55% Hispanic, and 52% male) participants were not
significantly different. Procedures were approved by the human studies
committees at BWH and BMC. Written consent was obtained from mothers;
assent was obtained for children age 7 years or older.

*Prenatal PM_{2.5} Levels*

Individuals' prenatal exposure to PM_{2.5}, an index of ambient
pollution from traffic and other sources, was estimated based on
residence over the duration of pregnancy (i.e., at enrollment and
updated if they moved) using a hybrid satellite based spatio-temporal
prediction model. The model incorporated Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) derived Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD)
measurements at a 10 km spatial resolution. The model combines the AOD
data with traditional Land Use Regression (LUR) predictors to yield
residence-specific estimates of daily PM_{2.5} as detailed elsewhere
([[#_ENREF_29][Kloog et al. 2011]]). The model was run using
day-specific AOD data calibrated against ground monitor-based PM_{2.5}
measurements derived from 78 monitoring stations covering New England.
The model incorporated traditional LUR (traffic density, point sources,
etc) and meteorological variables (temperature, wind speed, visibility,
elevation, distance to major roads, percent of open space, point
emissions and area emissions). The AOD-PM_{2.5} relationship was
calibrated daily using data from grid cells with both monitor and AOD
values using mixed models with random slopes for day, nested within
regions. For locations on days without AOD data (due to cloud coverage,
snow, etc.), the model was fit with a thin plate spline of latitude and
longitude and a random intercept for each cell (similar to universal
kriging) to impute predictions at these missing locations. The “out of
sample” ten-fold cross validation R^{2} for daily values were 0.83 and
0.81 for days with and without available AOD data, respectively. To
reduce potential noise caused by day-to-day variation of PM_{2.5}, for
each participant individual exposure levels were aggregated into weekly
averages for each week during gestation.

*Neurocognitive Measurements*

All neurodevelopmental tests were administered in children at age 6.5 ±
0.98 years.

/*Children's Intelligence quotient (IQ):*/ Child intelligence was
assessed using the full-scale IQ score on the Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children (WISC)-IV ([[#_ENREF_54][Wechsler 2003]]), which can
be completed without reading or writing skills in children at ages 6-16
years. The WISC-IV standardization sample is representative of the March
2000 U.S. Census data based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, parent
education level, and geographic locations ([[#_ENREF_54][Wechsler
2003]]), and has been widely used in culturally diverse populations.

/*Attention:*/ Attention was assessed with the Conners' Continuous
Performance Test-II (CPT-II) ([[#_ENREF_13][Conners 2000]]). The CPT
does not have reading or literacy requirements and can be administered
to children as young as age 6 years. The test consists of letters
flashing in succession and at variable rates on the screen. The child
was instructed to push the space bar as quickly as possible in response
to each letter except for "X". This test assesses response inhibition
(commission errors, CEs) as well as vigilance (omission errors, OEs).
Outcomes included OEs (failing to respond to a target), CEs (erroneously
responding to a non-target), and hit reaction time (HRT; mean reaction
time for all target responses) expressed as standardized percentiles
representing the performance of the study subject relative to the
performance by children of the same age in the normative sample
([[#_ENREF_13][Conners 2000]]). Higher percentiles indicate worse
performance (e.g., more errors or slower reaction time) related to
inattentiveness. The CPT has been widely used and prior studies have
found that reaction times are sensitive indicators of exposures to
toxicants ([[#_ENREF_56][White et al. 2009]]).

/*Memory:*/ We assess memory with the Wide Range Assessment of Memory &
Learning, 2nd Edition (WRAML-2) ([[#_ENREF_46][Sheslow and Adams
2003]]), a widely used standardized test normed for children aged 5-17
years among racially diverse groups. This test evaluates immediate and
delayed memory ability along with the acquisition of new learning. The
WRAML-2 yields an overall composite General Memory Index (GM) and its
components (Verbal Memory Index [VEM], Visual Memory Index [VIM], and
Attention/Concentration Index [AC] All measures are expressed as
age-standardized scores. Lower percentiles indicate poorer memory
functioning.

*Covariates*

Maternal age, race, and educational status were ascertained at
enrollment; information about child's sex, date of birth, gestational
age at birth, and birth weight were obtained by medical record review.
Women reported on smoking at enrollment and in the third trimester and
were classified as prenatal smokers if they reported smoking at either
visit. Mothers also reported postnatal smoking at each 3-month
postpartum interview. Children's blood lead levels were assessed using a
portable blood lead analyzer (LeadCare® II, Magellan Diagnostics, Inc.)
on the day of neurodevelopment testing.

*Statistical Analysis *

Analyses included 267 singleton full-term (≥37 weeks gestation)
children. In order to explore sensitive windows for effects of prenatal
PM_{2.5} in relation to neurodevelopmental outcomes, we constructed an
exposure lag space ([[#_ENREF_20][Gasparrini et al. 2010]]) using weekly
averages of daily predictions from our spatio-temporal PM_{2.5}
prediction model throughout that participant's gestational period. We
fit distributed lag models (DLMs) to estimate the time-varying
association between a given neurodevelopmental outcome and estimated
PM_{2.5} level during a given week in pregnancy. Specifically, we fit
the linear distributed lag model
$Y_{i} = \beta_{0} + \sum_{j = 1}^{n}{\lbrack\alpha_{j}\text{AP}_{\text{ij}}\rbrack}{+ \beta}_{1}x_{1i} + \beta_{2}x_{2i} + \ldots + \varepsilon_{i}$,
where $\text{AP}_{\text{ij}}$ is the estimated PM_{2.5} level in week
/j/ of pregnancy and $x_{1i}$, ..., $x_{\text{pi}}$ are the confounders
for subject i. Confounders included maternal age, race, education and
smoking status in all models, as well as child's sex in models not
stratified by sex. Without additional structure on the $\alpha_{j}$
coefficients, the estimates of the week-specific effects are typically
unstable due to collinearity among the weekly pollution averages.
Therefore, we fit constrained DLMs that assume these effects
$\alpha_{j}$ are a smooth function of j (week), such that $\alpha_{j}$ =
h(j). We modeled this smooth function using b-splines with 4 degrees of
freedom. A sensitive window is identified when the estimated pointwise
95% confidence bands do not include zero. Next, to assess whether the
sensitive window of prenatal PM_{2.5} exposure on childhood
neurodevelopment was different between boys and girls, sex-stratified
DLMs were run to assess potential sex-specific associations. To
demonstrate how the estimate of an association between PM_{2.5} exposure
and outcome would have differed from that based on the entire pregnancy
and had the sensitive windows been identified /a priori/, we then also
estimated sex-specific associations between prenatal PM_{2.5} levels
averaged across the sensitive windows identified by the DLMs in relation
to neurodevelopmental outcomes using multivariable linear regression
models, adjusting for maternal age, education, race, and
prenatal/postnatal maternal smoking. We also performed sensitivity
analyses by additionally including averaged postnatal PM_{2.5} levels
over the first 2 years of life (which were correlated with prenatal
exposure levels; Spearman's /r/=0.82, /p/<0.001), blood lead level
assessed on the day of neurodevelopment tests, and birth weight for
gestational age into the model. DLMs were implemented using the /dlnm/
package in /R/ (version 3.0.1, Vienna, Austria)
([[#_ENREF_20][Gasparrini et al. 2010]]), and other analyses were
performed in SAS (version 9.1.3, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).

*RESULTS*

Most mothers were ethnic minority (60% Hispanic, 25% African American),
had ≤ 12 years of education (69%), and were nonsmokers prenatally (81%);
the distribution of covariates did not differ by children's sex (Table
1). Table 2 summarizes the distribution of the neurocognitive domain
scores and ambient PM_{2.5} exposure levels by sex. Prenatal PM_{2.5}
levels were similar for boys and girls, and there was also no
significant sex difference in terms of gestational age at birth,
maternal age at enrollment, and children's age at neurocognitive testing
(Tables 1-2).

/*Distributed Lag Models (DLMs)*/

Figure 1 shows the associations between prenatal PM_{2.5} and child IQ
using DLMs for all children as well as stratified by sex, adjusting for
maternal age, race/ethnicity, education, pre- and postnatal maternal
smoking. “Sensitive windows” graphically appear as a bump during which
exposure is significantly associated with neurophenotype. We observed
significant associations between increased PM_{2.5} exposure and lower
children's IQ scores (lower scores indicate poorer functioning) around
late pregnancy (32-38 weeks of gestation) in boys but not in girls. When
models were run in boys and girls together, we did not find significant
associations between prenatal PM_{2.5} and attention domains. However,
when stratified by sex, we observed several sexually dimorphic results.
Significant associations were observed between higher PM_{2.5} levels in
mid-pregnancy (20-26 weeks of gestation) and increased omission errors,
and between higher PM_{2.5} exposures in late pregnancy (33-38 weeks of
gestation) and slower HRTs among boys (Figure 2; higher percentiles of
attention domains indicate less favorable performance); no association
was found with commission errors (see Supplemental Material, Figure S1).
On the other hand, we observed significant associations between higher
PM_{2.5} levels in early-to-mid pregnancy and adverse memory
performances only among girls. Specifically, higher exposure to PM_{2.5}
at 18-25 weeks gestation was associated with reduced VIM (18-25 weeks
window), AC (8-19 weeks window), and GM (14-21 weeks window) scores
among girls (Figure 3); no association was found with VEM (see
Supplemental Material, Figure S2).

/*Multivariable-adjusted Models Using PM_{2.5} Levels at Identified
Sensitive Windows*/

To further assess associations at the "sensitive windows" identified by
the DLMs, we also fit multivariable linear regression models using
PM_{2.5} levels averaged over the period that significant associations
were shown in the DLMs. That is, using the pointwise 95% CI bounds as a
guide, we restricted the model to just those time points when the
association was significant and repeated the analysis using a more
conventional linear regression approach. As most results were sexually
dimorphic, these models are sex-stratified adjusting for maternal age,
race, education, and prenatal/postnatal maternal smoking. Figure 4 shows
results of the domains where the DLMs suggested a sensitive window among
boys, including full-scale IQ (lower score indicates poorer functioning)
and two attention domains (omission errors and HRT; higher percentiles
indicate poorer performance). The effect estimates of PM_{2.5} averaged
across the sensitive windows in multivariable-adjusted linear models
were in a less favorable direction in boys for these domains, albeit
only the effect estimate for full-scale IQ achieved statistical
significance while that for HRT was marginally significant (omission
errors β=2.02, 95% CI=-0.62--4.66; HRT β=1.80, 95% CI=-0.98--2.78; IQ
β=-2.05, 95% CI=-3.97-- -0.13), while no significant associations were
found in girls (Figure 4A). Figure 5 shows the results of the three
WRAML-2 memory domain subscales (VIM, AC, and GM; lower percentiles
indicate poorer memory functioning) where the DLMs suggested a sensitive
window among girls. We found significant associations in girls during
the sensitive windows for these three memory domain subscales (VIM
β=-2.56, 95% CI=-4.77-- -0.34; AC β=-4.84, 95% CI=-8.00-- -1.69; GM
β=-2.88, 95% CI=-5.17-- -0.59), while no significant associations were
found in boys (Figure 5A). While sex-stratified analyses suggested
differences in these associations between boys and girls, the PM_{2.5} ×
sex interactions were not statistically significant in the interaction
models, potentially due to small cell sizes. When using PM_{2.5}
averaged over the entire pregnancy period, no significant associations
were found in any neurodevelopmental measures (Figures 4B and 5B),
primarily due to a loss of efficiency in health effect estimation that
results from using the entire pregnancy. That is, the point estimates
between the two analyses are not very different but the uncertainty of
the effect estimates are much larger for the analyses using the entire
pregnancy as compared to that using a more refined window.

Finally, sensitivity analyses additionally including postnatal PM_{2.5}
levels, blood lead level assessed on the day of neurodevelopment tests,
and birth weight for gestational age did not materially change these
results.

*DISCUSSION*

To our knowledge, this is the first study to leverage a combination of
weekly PM_{2.5} exposure estimates and distributed lag models in order
to objectively define windows of vulnerability to particulate air
pollution during gestation in relation to early childhood
neurodevelopment. Notably, our findings suggest that the sensitive
windows vary based on the neurocognitive domain being examined and by
sex. While animal studies have suggested that there may be sex
differences in the association between prenatal air pollution and
neurodevelopment in the offspring ([[#_ENREF_6][Bolton et al. 2014]];
[[#_ENREF_15][Dada et al. 2014]]), no human study to date has examined
sex-specific associations in this context. Our findings suggest that
boys were more susceptible than girls to PM_{2.5} exposure later in
pregnancy in relation to full-scale IQ and in mid- and late-pregnancy in
relation to attention performance indices, whereas girls were more
susceptible to PM_{2.5} exposure around early and mid-pregnancy in
regards to memory-related performance.

These data add to a growing literature linking prenatal air pollution to
children's neurodevelopment. Perera et al. measured PAH using 48-hour
personal sampling during the third trimester of pregnancy in a New York
City cohort and found significant associations with mental developmental
delays measured by the Bayley Scales of Infant Development--Revised at
age 3 years ([[#_ENREF_38][Perera et al. 2006]]), decreased full-scale
IQ at 5 years of age ([[#_ENREF_37][Perera et al. 2009]]), as well as
increased attention problems in 6-7 years olds which were also related
to maternal and DNA adducts specific to benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) measured at
birth ([[#_ENREF_39][Perera et al. 2012]]). Edwards et al.
([[#_ENREF_17][Edwards et al. 2010]]) found that PAH measured by 48-hour
personal sampling during the second or third trimester was significantly
associated with lower IQ scores at 5 years of age. Guxens and colleagues
([[#_ENREF_23][Guxens et al. 2012]]) estimated prenatal NO_{2} levels
using LUR models in four regions in Spain and found that the NO_{2}
levels averaged over the pregnancy were associated with decreased mental
development index measured by Bayley Scales of Infant Development in
children around 14 months of age. These authors also recently conducted
a meta-analysis pooling data from six European birth cohorts, and found
that NO_{2} averaged over pregnancy estimated by LUR was associated with
delayed psychomotor development in children aged 1-6 years old
([[#_ENREF_24][Guxens et al. 2014]]). Kim et al. ([[#_ENREF_28][Kim et
al. 2014]]) found significant relationships of higher prenatal PM_{10}
levels estimated by inverse distance weighting modeling with both
delayed mental and psychomotor developmental index at 6-24 months of
age. Guxens et al. ([[#_ENREF_24][Guxens et al. 2014]]) also reported a
marginally significant inverse association between higher average
PM_{2.5} levels during pregnancy estimated by LUR models with poorer
psychomotor development in children at 1-6 years of age, albeit not with
general cognition.

To our knowledge, this is the first study to use data driven statistics
to define susceptibility windows, removing much of the subjectivity that
currently guides the decision of when to measure environmental exposure.
The advantage of implementing a statistical method that resolves the
pattern of associations across time is apparent. Our approach is based
on the data /per se/ rather than assigning /a priori/ exposure time
points arbitrarily, e.g., using clinically defined trimesters, in order
to more definitively identify sensitive windows for effects on
neurodevelopment. Obviously, this approach is aided by an air pollution
model with weekly temporal resolution across pregnancy. However, if
other exposure metrics could generate similar temporally resolved data
the same techniques could be applied.

More refined estimation of the time window in which air pollution has
the greatest impact may provide insights into underlying mechanisms as
well as the etiology of sex-specific neurotoxic effects. While the
mechanisms linking air pollution exposure and neurodevelopment are not
completely understood, neuroinflammation is increasingly thought to play
a central role. Animal studies demonstrate that particulate air
pollution induces neuroinflammatory processes which may subsequently
disrupt neurodevelopment in offspring ([[#_ENREF_1][Allen et al. 2014]];
[[#_ENREF_6][Bolton et al. 2014]]; [[#_ENREF_7][Bolton et al. 2012]];
[[#_ENREF_27][Hougaard et al. 2008]]). In addition, neuroinflammation
may disturb normal programmed cell death as neuroapoptosis is part of
normal neural differentiation which occurs around mid-to-late pregnancy
in multiple brain regions ([[#_ENREF_52][Tau and Peterson 2010]]).
Increased neuroinflammation from PM has been linked to structural
changes in the brain with smaller brain volume and reduced thickness of
the prefrontal cortex ([[#_ENREF_45][Semmler et al. 2005]]), which in
turn, has been linked to attention deficit disorders
([[#_ENREF_26][Hauser et al. 2014]]). The prefrontal cortex is rich in
dopaminergic neurons and disruption of dopaminergic pathways through
inflammation may also play a role. Neuroinflammation has been linked to
activation of memory related kinase ([[#_ENREF_58][Yao et al. 2014]]) as
well as neuroapoptosis in the hippocampus which is important to memory
([[#_ENREF_45][Semmler et al. 2005]]; [[#_ENREF_49][Stark et al.
2002]]). Neuroinflammation induced by air pollution may disrupt the
development of hippocampus fields CA1-3 as well as the proliferation of
granule neurons within the hippocampus ([[#_ENREF_2][Bayer et al.
1993]]). Brain inflammatory responses may reduce the capacity to provide
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) needed for memory-related
plasticity processes at hippocampal synapses ([[#_ENREF_36][Patterson
2014]]). Moreover, animal studies of PM exposure consistently
demonstrate microglial activation in response to exposure. Microglia are
resident macrophages in the CNS and play a critical role in neural
development, synaptic plasticity, and neurobehavior. Morphological
differences in neuronal dendritic spines (representing the number of
synapses formed) and microglial colonization have been demonstrated in
the hippocampus, frontal cortex, amygdala and pre-optic area during
early development. Pro-inflammatory environmental toxins may activate
microglia altering production of cytokines and chemokines that disrupt
neurodevelopment. Between 20 to 28 weeks, myelination (the maturation of
nerve cells whereby a layer of myelin forms around the axons allowing
nerve impulses to travel faster) begins first in white matter in
subcortical and later in cortical regions gradually increasing during
pregnancy ([[#_ENREF_52][Tau and Peterson 2010]]). Disrupted myelination
in prefrontal cortical regions may also result from neuroimmune
activation. Studies also suggest that synaptogenesis (the formation of
synapses between neurons in the nervous system) in the fetal brain
begins in mid-pregnancy ([[#_ENREF_52][Tau and Peterson 2010]]), and
disruption in these processes has been linked with altered spatial and
trace memory ([[#_ENREF_41][Ramirez-Amaya et al. 2001]];
[[#_ENREF_47][Shors 2004]]). Other data suggest that neuroinflammation
during mid-to-late pregnancy disrupts both the size and the structure as
well as the programming processes in the fetal brain, including
neuroapoptosis, myelination as well as the synaptic pruning and the
maturation of the Ventral Tegmental Area (VTA) ([[#_ENREF_16][Donev and
Thome 2010]]; [[#_ENREF_22][Gillies et al. 2014]]). The VTA is the site
of dopaminergic neuron cell bodies that project to the frontal and
prefrontal cortex. The VTA is critical to reward behaviors, motivation
and attention.

Sex hormones influence these complicated processes which may contribute
to sex differences in their disruption by pro-inflammatory triggers such
as air pollution ([[#_ENREF_33][Melcangi et al. 2008]]). Sex difference
in microglial colonization of the CNS have been observed, with males
generally showing a more activated morphology ([[#_ENREF_44][Schwarz et
al. 2012]]). The neuron-glial signaling cascade may respond to
pro-inflammatory triggers such as particulate air pollution differently
in males and females due to the bidirectional communication between the
neuroendocrine (e.g., sex steroids) and immune systems during fetal
development ([[#_ENREF_35][Morale et al. 2001]]). These differences in
immune response have been posited to explain differences in psychiatric
disease prevalence by sex. Our findings suggest that associations with
prenatal air pollution were stronger in boys for the attention measures
as well as full-scale IQ. Notably, in another prospective urban Boston
birth cohort, we previously reported an association between increased
postnatal early childhood traffic-related air pollution (black carbon)
exposure and attention problems that was more evident in school-aged
boys compared to girls ([[#_ENREF_12][Chiu et al. 2013]]). In contrast
to our finding for attention, we found that associations between
prenatal PM_{2.5} and memory domains were more evident in girls. To our
knowledge, no previous studies have assessed sex differences on the
association between prenatal air pollution and memory domains. As
mentioned above, the adverse association between prenatal PM_{2.5} and
memory might be partially due to disruption in the development of
hippocampus neurons ([[#_ENREF_2][Bayer et al. 1993]]) . Visual memory
is a component of spatial memory which is another sexually dimorphic
trait, but differs from attention in that girls tend to have poorer
performance than boys. Girls may be more vulnerable at baseline to
prenatal air pollution on visual memory performance and the
neuroinflammtion from PM exposure may exacerbate this sensitivity.
Studies also suggest that testosterone may enhance hippocampal
neurogenesis via increased cell survival in the dentate gyrus through an
androgen-dependent pathway which suggests a protective mechanism for
boys ([[#_ENREF_48][Spritzer and Galea 2007]]). A recent animal study,
however, has suggested that male mice might be more susceptible to loss
of hippocampal volumes ([[#_ENREF_15][Dada et al. 2014]]). Further
research in the role of PM-induced neuroinflammation on sexually
dimorphic development is clearly needed. Joint animal/epidemiologic
research may be more efficient than isolated research approaches, as
epidemiology can define the proper susceptibility window, then animal
research can use that information to efficiently study mechanism while
focusing on exposure windows that are more relevant in humans. For
example, by examining the developmental processes that occur in the
anatomical regions critical for each functional domain during the
identified developmental window in epidemiological research, we may be
able to target animal studies to induce similar timed exposures while
studying induced biological changes.

There are several strengths of this study. First, we were able to
estimate particulate air pollution exposure on a daily basis for each
woman over gestation using a validated state-of-the-art hybrid
spatio-temporal LUR model incorporating satellite-derived AOD measures.
We then leveraged these exposure estimates to implement a data driven,
advanced statistical method to objectively identify susceptibility
windows for PM. Second, our study population consists of a lower-SES
ethnically mixed inner-city cohort that may be more highly exposed to
ambient pollution. Finally, this is the first study to examine
sex-specific effects of prenatal particulate air pollution on a range of
neurodevelopment domains including global intelligence, attention, and
memory. We also acknowledge some limitations. We did not find
statistically significant interactions between sex and PM_{2.5} likely
due to our sample size, albeit results were significant in stratified
analyses for several test outcomes. Also, while we were able to control
for postnatal air pollution exposure as well as several factors known to
be important in children's cognitive development, we did not have data
on dietary and other environmental factors that may co-vary with air
pollution such as noise exposure. Further studies in larger samples may
therefore consider sex-specific joint or interactive associations among
these additional factors. Finally, our results may be more applicable to
lower SES racial/ethnic minority populations which may not represent the
overall population of the U.S.. More studies are needed to replicate
these findings and understand the underlying mechanisms. Susceptibility
windows likely reflect several biological vulnerabilities within these
anatomic regions, perhaps related to gene expression, protein
modification, upstream DNA modifications or permeability of the blood
brain barrier.

In summary, this study objectively elucidated sensitive prenatal time
windows as well as sex differences on the association between prenatal
PM_{2.5}and neurodevelopmental outcomes in early childhood. Our findings
suggest that advanced statistical methods when combined with highly
temporally resolved exposure data can identify susceptibility windows to
environmental exposures that may enhance our ability to find effects and
identify vulnerable groups. This information should be employed in a
multi-stage approach coupled with animal studies that can leverage
epidemiologic data on susceptibility windows to further our
understanding of brain growth and structural development during
gestation. Increased exposure to prenatal particulate air pollution may
have sex-specific time-dependent effects on childhood neurodevelopment,
and the effects may vary for different cognitive or behavioral domains
that reflect different underlying pathways.

| *Table 1*. Participant characteristics: ACCESS study   |
|--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+-----------+------------------+--------+-------------------+------+--------+-------------|
| *　*                                                   | *All children (n=267)*   | *　*      | *Boys (n=148)*   | *　*   | *Girls (n=119)*   |
| *Race/Ethnicity*                                       |                          |           |                  |        |                   |      |        |             |
| Black                                                  | 66                       | 24.7      |                  | 36     | 24.3              |      | 30     | 25.2        |
| Hispanic                                               | 160                      | 59.9      |                  | 86     | 58.1              |      | 74     | 62.2        |
| White/Other                                            | 41                       | 15.4      |                  | 26     | 17.6              |      | 15     | 12.6        |
| *Maternal education* (n, %)                            |                          |           |                  |        |                   |      |        |             |
| >12 yrs                                                | 84                       | 31.5      |                  | 45     | 30.4              |      | 39     | 32.8        |
| ≤12 yrs                                                | 183                      | 68.5      |                  | 103    | 69.6              |      | 80     | 67.2        |
| *Maternal smoking status* (n, %)                       |                          |           |                  |        |                   |      |        |             |
| Never smoked                                           | 215                      | 80.5      |                  | 121    | 81.8              |      | 94     | 79.0        |
| Smoked prenatally, but not postnatally                 | 14                       | 5.2       |                  | 8      | 5.4               |      | 6      | 5.0         |
| Did not smoke prenatally, but smoked postnatally       | 14                       | 5.2       |                  | 8      | 5.4               |      | 6      | 5.0         |
| Smoked both pre- and postnatally                       | 24                       | 9.0       |                  | 11     | 7.4               |      | 13     | 10.9        |
| *Gestational age at birth* (weeks; mean, SD)           | 39.0                     | 1.8       |                  | 38.9   | 1.9               |      | 39.1   | 1.8         |
| *Child's age at cognitive test* (year; median, IQR)    | 6.5                      | 6.0-7.1   |                  | 6.4    | 6.0-7.1           |      | 6.5    | 6.0-7.2     |
| *Maternal age at enrollment* (years; median, IQR)      | 26                       | 23-32.2   | 　               | 26     | 23-31.3           | 　   | 27     | 23.2-33.3   |

| *Table 2*. Neurocognitive test results and averaged prenatal PM_{2.5} exposure levels by sex   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------+----------+----------+-------------+------+----------+-------------|
| *　*                                                                                           | *All children*   | *　*        | *Boys*   | *　*     | *Girls*     |
| /*Variables*/                                                                                  | Median           | IQR         | 　       | Median   | IQR         | 　   | Median   | IQR         |
| Averaged prenatal PM_{2.5} level (µg/m^{3})                                                    | 11.3             | 10.5-12.0   |          | 11.2     | 10.4-11.9   |      | 11.6     | 10.6-12.0   |
| *Intelligence quotient; IQ (WISC-IV) ^{a}*                                                     |                  |             |          |          |             |      |          |             |
| Full-scale IQ score                                                                            | 94               | 87-102      |          | 93       | 86-102      |      | 95       | 88-103      |
| *Attention domains (CPT-II) ^{b}*                                                              |                  |             |          |          |             |      |          |             |
| Omission error percentile                                                                      | 91.8             | 62.0-99.0   |          | 92.6     | 58.8-99.0   |      | 91.6     | 67.0-99.0   |
| Commission error percentile                                                                    | 70.9             | 45.9-86.5   |          | 77.8     | 52.1-88.1   |      | 68.5     | 44.2-85.4   |
| Hit reaction time percentile                                                                   | 79.3             | 44.7-94.0   |          | 74.9     | 38.5-94.1   |      | 81.5     | 51.3-93.9   |
| *Memory domains (WRAML-2) ^{c}*                                                                |                  |             |          |          |             |      |          |             |
| Verbal Memory Index percentile                                                                 | 42               | 21-63       |          | 42       | 21-55       |      | 50       | 27-70       |
| Visual Memory Index percentile                                                                 | 27               | 12-50       |          | 34       | 8-58        |      | 24       | 12-50       |
| Attention/Concentration Index percentile                                                       | 50               | 27-73       |          | 50       | 24-73       |      | 50       | 27-73       |
| General Memory Index percentile                                                                | 37               | 16-55       |          | 34       | 14-55       |      | 37       | 17-55       |
| ^{a} Lower score in full-scale IQ indicates more adverse functioning                           |
|                                                                                                |
| ^{b} Higher percentile in CPT-II measures indicates worse performance                          |
|                                                                                                |
| ^{c} Lower percentile in WRAML-2 measures indicates poorer memory functioning                  |

[[media/image1.jpeg]]

*Figure 1. Sex-specific associations between weekly prenatal PM_{2.5}
levels over gestation and full-scale IQ*

This figure demonstrates PM_{2.5} exposure over pregnancy and full-scale
IQ scores (WISC-IV) using distributed lag models assuming week-specific
effects. Models were adjusted for maternal age, race, education, and
prenatal/postnatal maternal smoking. The y-axis represents the change in
full-scale IQ percentile associated with a 10 μg/m^{3} increase in
PM_{2.5}; the x- axis is gestational age in weeks. Lower IQ scores
indicate less favorable functioning. Solid lines show the predicted
change in the IQ percentile. Gray areas indicate 95% CIs. A sensitive
window is identified when the estimated pointwise 95% CI does not
include zero.

[[media/image2.jpeg]]

*Figure 2. Sex-specific associations between weekly prenatal PM_{2.5}
levels over gestation and attention domains *

This figure demonstrates PM_{2.5} exposure over pregnancy and attention
domains (CPT-II) using distributed lag models assuming week-specific
effects. Models were adjusted for maternal age, race, education, and
prenatal/postnatal maternal smoking. The y-axis represents the change in
attention domain score percentile associated with a 10 μg/m^{3} increase
in PM_{2.5}; the x-axis is gestational age in weeks. Higher percentiles
in attention domains indicate less favorable performance. Solid lines
show the predicted change in each test score percentile. Gray areas
indicate 95% CIs. A sensitive window is identified when the estimated
pointwise 95% CI does not include zero.

[[media/image3.jpeg]]

*Figure 3. Sex-specific associations between weekly prenatal PM2.5
levels over gestation and memory domains*

This figure demonstrates PM_{2.5} exposure over pregnancy and memory
domains (WRAML-2) using distributed lag models assuming week-specific
effects. Models were adjusted for maternal age, race, education, and
prenatal/postnatal maternal smoking. The y-axis represents the change in
memory domain score percentile associated with a 10 μg/m^{3} increase in
PM_{2.5}; the x-axis is gestational age in weeks. Lower percentiles in
memory domains indicate less favorable performance. Solid lines show the
predicted change in each test score percentile. Gray areas indicate 95%
CIs. A sensitive window is identified when the estimated pointwise 95%
CI does not include zero.

[[media/image4.jpeg]]

*Figure 4. Sex-specific associations between PM_{2.5} exposure over
gestation and attention domains and IQ: Comparing models based on levels
averaged over pregnancy vs. identified sensitive windows*

This figure demonstrates estimated sex-specific associations and
associated 95% CIs between prenatal PM_{2.5} levels and each attention
related domain (Conner's CPT) and full-scale IQ (WISC-IV) percentiles,
obtained from multivariate regression models in which the prenatal
PM_{2.5} levels were (A) averaged across the sensitive windows
identified by DLMs and (B) averaged over gestation. Higher percentiles
indicate more omission errors or slower HRT (indicators of
inattentiveness), whereas lower full-scale IQ indicates poorer composite
intellectual performance. Models were adjusted for maternal age, race,
education, and prenatal/postnatal maternal smoking.

[[media/image5.jpeg]]

*Figure 5. Sex-specific associations between PM_{2.5} exposure over
gestation and memory domains: Comparing models based on levels averaged
over pregnancy vs. identified sensitive windows*

This figure demonstrates estimated sex-specific associations and
associated 95% CIs between prenatal PM_{2.5} levels and each
memory-related domain (WRAML-2) percentiles, obtained from multivariate
regression models in which the prenatal PM_{2.5} levels were (A)
averaged across the sensitive windows identified by DLMs and (B)
averaged over gestation. Lower percentiles indicate less favorable
memory related performance. Models were adjusted for maternal age, race,
education, and prenatal/postnatal maternal smoking.

*REFERENCES *

Allen JL, Liu X, Pelkowski S, Palmer B, Conrad K, Oberdorster G, et al.
2014. Early postnatal exposure to ultrafine particulate matter air
pollution: persistent ventriculomegaly, neurochemical disruption, and
glial activation preferentially in male mice. Environ Health Perspect
122:939-945.

Bayer SA, Altman J, Russo RJ, Zhang X. 1993. Timetables of neurogenesis
in the human brain based on experimentally determined patterns in the
rat. Neurotoxicology 14:83-144.

Bellinger DC. 2007. Children's cognitive health: the influence of
environmental chemical exposures. Altern Ther Health Med 13:S140-144.

Block ML, Calderon-Garciduenas L. 2009. Air pollution: mechanisms of
neuroinflammation and CNS disease. Trends Neurosci 32:506-516.

Block ML, Elder A, Auten RL, Bilbo SD, Chen H, Chen JC, et al. 2012. The
outdoor air pollution and brain health workshop. Neurotoxicology
33:972-984.

Bolton JL, Auten RL, Bilbo SD. 2014. Prenatal air pollution exposure
induces sexually dimorphic fetal programming of metabolic and
neuroinflammatory outcomes in adult offspring. Brain Behav Immun
37:30-44.

Bolton JL, Smith SH, Huff NC, Gilmour MI, Foster WM, Auten RL, et al.
2012. Prenatal air pollution exposure induces neuroinflammation and
predisposes offspring to weight gain in adulthood in a sex-specific
manner. FASEB J 26:4743-4754.

Boulet SL, Boyle CA, Schieve LA. 2009. Health care use and health and
functional impact of developmental disabilities among US children,
1997-2005. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 163:19-26.

Braun JM, Hoffman E, Schwartz J, Sanchez B, Schnaas L, Mercado-Garcia A,
et al. 2012. Assessing windows of susceptibility to lead-induced
cognitive deficits in Mexican children. Neurotoxicology 33:1040-1047.

Braun JM, Kalkbrenner AE, Calafat AM, Yolton K, Ye X, Dietrich KN, et
al. 2011. Impact of early-life bisphenol A exposure on behavior and
executive function in children. Pediatrics 128:873-882.

Bressler J, Kim KA, Chakraborti T, Goldstein G. 1999. Molecular
mechanisms of lead neurotoxicity. Neurochem Res 24:595-600.

Chiu YH, Bellinger DC, Coull BA, Anderson S, Barber R, Wright RO, et al.
2013. Associations between traffic-related black carbon exposure and
attention in a prospective birth cohort of urban children. Environ
Health Perspect 121:859-864.

Conners CK. 2000. Conners' Continuous Performance Test II: Computer
Program for Windows Technical Guide and Software Manual. North
Tonawanda, NY.

Costello EJ, Mustillo S, Erkanli A, Keeler G, Angold A. 2003. Prevalence
and development of psychiatric disorders in childhood and adolescence.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 60:837-844.

Dada T, Rosenzweig JM, Al Shammary M, Firdaus W, Al Rebh S, Borbiev T,
et al. 2014. Mouse model of intrauterine inflammation: sex-specific
differences in long-term neurologic and immune sequelae. Brain Behav
Immun 38:142-150.

Donev R, Thome J. 2010. Inflammation: good or bad for ADHD? Atten Defic
Hyperact Disord 2:257-266.

Edwards SC, Jedrychowski W, Butscher M, Camann D, Kieltyka A, Mroz E, et
al. 2010. Prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
and children's intelligence at 5 years of age in a prospective cohort
study in Poland. Environ Health Perspect 118:1326-1331.

Engel SM, Miodovnik A, Canfield RL, Zhu C, Silva MJ, Calafat AM, et al.
2010. Prenatal phthalate exposure is associated with childhood behavior
and executive functioning. Environ Health Perspect 118:565-571.

Froehlich TE, Lanphear BP, Epstein JN, Barbaresi WJ, Katusic SK, Kahn
RS. 2007. Prevalence, recognition, and treatment of
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in a national sample of US
children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 161:857-864.

Gasparrini A, Armstrong B, Kenward MG. 2010. Distributed lag non-linear
models. Stat Med 29:2224-2234.

Genc S, Zadeoglulari Z, Fuss SH, Genc K. 2012. The adverse effects of
air pollution on the nervous system. J Toxicol 2012:782462.

Gillies GE, Virdee K, McArthur S, Dalley JW. 2014. Sex-dependent
diversity in ventral tegmental dopaminergic neurons and developmental
programing: A molecular, cellular and behavioral analysis. Neuroscience
282C:69-85.

Guxens M, Aguilera I, Ballester F, Estarlich M, Fernandez-Somoano A,
Lertxundi A, et al. 2012. Prenatal exposure to residential air pollution
and infant mental development: modulation by antioxidants and
detoxification factors. Environ Health Perspect 120:144-149.

Guxens M, Garcia-Esteban R, Giorgis-Allemand L, Forns J, Badaloni C,
Ballester F, et al. 2014. Air pollution during pregnancy and childhood
cognitive and psychomotor development: six European birth cohorts.
Epidemiology 25:636-647.

Hamadani JD, Tofail F, Nermell B, Gardner R, Shiraji S, Bottai M, et al.
2011. Critical windows of exposure for arsenic-associated impairment of
cognitive function in pre-school girls and boys: a population-based
cohort study. Int J Epidemiol 40:1593-1604.

Hauser TU, Iannaccone R, Ball J, Mathys C, Brandeis D, Walitza S, et al.
2014. Role of the medial prefrontal cortex in impaired decision making
in juvenile attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. JAMA Psychiatry
71:1165-1173.

Hougaard KS, Jensen KA, Nordly P, Taxvig C, Vogel U, Saber AT, et al.
2008. Effects of prenatal exposure to diesel exhaust particles on
postnatal development, behavior, genotoxicity and inflammation in mice.
Part Fibre Toxicol 5:3.

Kim E, Park H, Hong YC, Ha M, Kim Y, Kim BN, et al. 2014. Prenatal
exposure to PM10 and NO2 and children's neurodevelopment from birth to
24 months of age: mothers and Children's Environmental Health (MOCEH)
study. Sci Total Environ 481:439-445.

Kloog I, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J. 2011. Assessing
temporally and spatially resolved PM_{2.5} exposures for epidemiological
studies using satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos
Environ 45:6267-6275.

Lavenex P, Banta Lavenex P. 2013. Building hippocampal circuits to learn
and remember: insights into the development of human memory. Behav Brain
Res 254:8-21.

Leonard H, Wen X. 2002. The epidemiology of mental retardation:
challenges and opportunities in the new millennium. Ment Retard Dev
Disabil Res Rev 8:117-134.

Liu J, Lewis G. 2014. Environmental toxicity and poor cognitive outcomes
in children and adults. J Environ Health 76:130-138.

Melcangi RC, Garcia-Segura LM, Mensah-Nyagan AG. 2008. Neuroactive
steroids: state of the art and new perspectives. Cell Mol Life Sci
65:777-797.

Montes G, Lotyczewski BS, Halterman JS, Hightower AD. 2012. School
readiness among children with behavior problems at entrance into
kindergarten: results from a US national study. Eur J Pediatr
171:541-548.

Morale MC, Gallo F, Tirolo C, Testa N, Caniglia S, Marletta N, et al.
2001. Neuroendocrine-immune (NEI) circuitry from neuron-glial
interactions to function: Focus on gender and HPA-HPG interactions on
early programming of the NEI system. Immunol Cell Biol 79:400-417.

Patterson S. 2014. Immune dysregulation and cognitive vulnerability in
the aging brain: Interactions of microglia, IL-1beta, BDNF and synaptic
plasticity. Neuropharmacology.

Perera FP, Li Z, Whyatt R, Hoepner L, Wang S, Camann D, et al. 2009.
Prenatal airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon exposure and child IQ
at age 5 years. Pediatrics 124:e195-202.

Perera FP, Rauh V, Whyatt RM, Tsai WY, Tang D, Diaz D, et al. 2006.
Effect of prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
on neurodevelopment in the first 3 years of life among inner-city
children. Environ Health Perspect 114:1287-1292.

Perera FP, Tang D, Wang S, Vishnevetsky J, Zhang B, Diaz D, et al. 2012.
Prenatal polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) exposure and child
behavior at age 6-7 years. Environ Health Perspect 120:921-926.

Perou R, Bitsko RH, Blumberg SJ, Pastor P, Ghandour RM, Gfroerer JC, et
al. 2013. Mental health surveillance among children - United States,
2005-2011. MMWR Surveill Summ 62:1-35.

Ramirez-Amaya V, Balderas I, Sandoval J, Escobar ML, Bermudez-Rattoni F.
2001. Spatial long-term memory is related to mossy fiber synaptogenesis.
J Neurosci 21:7340-7348.

Rodier PM. 2004. Environmental causes of central nervous system
maldevelopment. Pediatrics 113:1076-1083.

Sagiv SK, Thurston SW, Bellinger DC, Altshul LM, Korrick SA. 2012.
Neuropsychological Measures of Attention and Impulse Control among
8-Year-Old Children Exposed Prenatally to Organochlorines. Environ
Health Perspect 120:904-909.

Schwarz JM, Sholar PW, Bilbo SD. 2012. Sex differences in microglial
colonization of the developing rat brain. J Neurochem 120:948-963.

Semmler A, Okulla T, Sastre M, Dumitrescu-Ozimek L, Heneka MT. 2005.
Systemic inflammation induces apoptosis with variable vulnerability of
different brain regions. J Chem Neuroanat 30:144-157.

Sheslow D, Adams W. 2003. Wide Range Assessment of Memory and Learning
Second Edition administration and technical manual. Lutz, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.

Shors TJ. 2004. Memory traces of trace memories: neurogenesis,
synaptogenesis and awareness. Trends Neurosci 27:250-256.

Spritzer MD, Galea LA. 2007. Testosterone and dihydrotestosterone, but
not estradiol, enhance survival of new hippocampal neurons in adult male
rats. Dev Neurobiol 67:1321-1333.

Stark CE, Bayley PJ, Squire LR. 2002. Recognition memory for single
items and for associations is similarly impaired following damage to the
hippocampal region. Learn Mem 9:238-242.

Stringari J, Nunes AK, Franco JL, Bohrer D, Garcia SC, Dafre AL, et al.
2008. Prenatal methylmercury exposure hampers glutathione antioxidant
system ontogenesis and causes long-lasting oxidative stress in the mouse
brain. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 227:147-154.

Tatsuta N, Nakai K, Murata K, Suzuki K, Iwai-Shimada M, Kurokawa N, et
al. 2014. Impacts of prenatal exposures to polychlorinated biphenyls,
methylmercury, and lead on intellectual ability of 42-month-old children
in Japan. Environ Res 133:321-326.

Tau GZ, Peterson BS. 2010. Normal development of brain circuits.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35:147-168.

Volk HE, Hertz-Picciotto I, Delwiche L, Lurmann F, McConnell R. 2011.
Residential proximity to freeways and autism in the CHARGE study.
Environ Health Perspect 119:873-877.

Wechsler D. 2003. Wechsler intelligence scale for children, fourth
edition (WISC-IV): Administration and scoring manual. San Antonio, TX:
The Psychological Corporation.

Weiss B. 2000. Vulnerability to pesticide neurotoxicity is a lifetime
issue. Neurotoxicology 21:67-73.

White RF, Campbell R, Echeverria D, Knox SS, Janulewicz P. 2009.
Assessment of neuropsychological trajectories in longitudinal
population-based studies of children. J Epidemiol Community Health 63
Suppl 1:i15-26.

Wright RJ, Suglia SF, Levy J, Fortun K, Shields A, Subramanian S, et al.
2008. Transdisciplinary research strategies for understanding socially
patterned disease: the Asthma Coalition on Community, Environment, and
Social Stress (ACCESS) project as a case study. Cien Saude Colet
13:1729-1742.

Yao G, Yue H, Yun Y, Sang N. 2014. Chronic SO inhalation above
environmental standard impairs neuronal behavior and represses glutamate
receptor gene expression and memory-related kinase activation via
neuroinflammation in rats. Environ Res 137C:85-93.

Zanchi AC, Fagundes LS, Barbosa F, Jr., Bernardi R, Rhoden CR, Saldiva
PH, et al. 2010. Pre and post-natal exposure to ambient level of air
pollution impairs memory of rats: the role of oxidative stress. Inhal
Toxicol 22:910-918.
