www.nature.com/scientificdata

OPEN SUBJECT CATEGORIES » Environmental health » Risk factors » Plant
physiology » Plant breeding

Received: 07 May 2015 Accepted: 17 June 2015 Published: 21 July 2015

Impacts of elevated atmospheric CO2 on nutrient content of important
food crops Lee H. Dietterich1, Antonella Zanobetti2, Itai Kloog3, Peter
Huybers4, Andrew D.B. Leakey5, Arnold J. Bloom6, Eli Carlisle7, Nimesha
Fernando8,9, Glenn Fitzgerald10, Toshihiro Hasegawa11, N. Michele
Holbrook12, Randall L. Nelson13, Robert Norton8,14, Michael J. Ottman15,
Victor Raboy16, Hidemitsu Sakai11, Karla A. Sartor17, Joel Schwartz2,
Saman Seneweera8,18, Yasuhiro Usui11, Satoshi Yoshinaga19 & Samuel S.
Myers2,20 One of the many ways that climate change may affect human
health is by altering the nutrient content of food crops. However,
previous attempts to study the effects of increased atmospheric CO2 on
crop nutrition have been limited by small sample sizes and/or artiﬁcial
growing conditions. Here we present data from a metaanalysis of the
nutritional contents of the edible portions of 41 cultivars of six major
crop species grown using free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE) technology to
expose crops to ambient and elevated CO2 concentrations in otherwise
normal ﬁeld cultivation conditions. This data, collected across three
continents, represents over ten times more data on the nutrient content
of crops grown in FACE experiments than was previously available. We
expect it to be deeply useful to future studies, such as efforts to
understand the impacts of elevated atmospheric CO2 on crop macro- and
micronutrient concentrations, or attempts to alleviate harmful effects
of these changes for the billions of people who depend on these crops
for essential nutrients.

Design Type(s)

time series design • parallel group design • growth condition
intervention design

Measurement Type(s)

differences in chemical composition

Technology Type(s)

elemental analysis

Factor Type(s)

controlled atmosphere composition

Sample Characteristic(s)

Triticum aestivum • Australia • Pisum sativum • Sorghum bicolor • United
States of America • Oryza sativa • Japan • Zea mays • Glycine max

1

Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. 2Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.
H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. 3The
Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, PO Box 653, Beer Sheva, Israel. 4Department of
Earth and Planetary Science, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA. 5Department of Plant Biology and Institute for
Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois 61801, USA. 6Department of Plant Sciences, University of
California at Davis, Davis, California 95616, USA. 7Department of Land,
Air, & Water Resources, University of California at Davis, Davis,
California 95616, USA. 8 Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural
Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.
9Faculty of Science and Technology, Centre for Environmental Management,
Federation University, University Drive, Mount Helen, Victoria 3350,
Australia. 10 Department of Economic Development, Jobs, Transport and
Resources, Horsham, Victoria 3001, Australia. 11Agro-Meteorology
Division, National Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8604, Japan. 12Department of Organismic and Evolutionary
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.
13United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research
Service, Soybean/Maize Germplasm, Pathology, and Genetics Research Unit,
Department of Crop Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois
61801, USA. 14International Plant Nutrition Institute, 54 Florence St,
Horsham, Victoria 3400, Australia. 15School of Plant Sciences,
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA. 16United States
Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, Aberdeen,
Idaho, 83210, USA. 17Compa Industries, Inc., Los Alamos National
Laboratory Environmental Protection Division, Los Alamos, New Mexico
87545, USA. 18Center for Crop Health, University of Southern Queensland,
Toowoomba, QLD 4350, Australia. 19Hokuriku Research Center, NARO
Agricultural Research Center, National Agricultural and Food Research
Organization, Joetsu, Niigata 943-0193, Japan. 20Harvard University
Center for the Environment, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L.H.D.
(email: lee.dietterich@post.harvard.edu).

SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150036 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36

1

www.nature.com/sdata/

Background & Summary Climate change may have numerous effects on human
health, not least via effects on agriculture and nutrition. Because
plant productivity is fundamentally tied to atmospheric CO2 by
photosynthesis, changes in atmospheric CO2 concentration ([CO2]) may
have cascading effects on numerous aspects of plant biochemistry. If
these cascading effects include changes in the nutrient content of
staple crops, this could have substantial implications for public health
in regions where people rely on those crops for critical nutrients.
Indeed, nutrient deﬁciencies are already a major global public health
problem1--3. Previous attempts to examine how increasing atmospheric
[CO2] affects crop nutrition have been hampered by artiﬁcial growing
conditions and/or small sample sizes. For instance, there were several
reports of decreases in zinc, iron, and protein in wheat4--7, barley5,
and rice8 grown in outdoor opentopped chambers or in indoor
climate-controlled growth chambers. However, the advent of free-air CO2
enrichment (FACE) technology has allowed researchers to grow plants
under standard ﬁeld management practices while precisely manipulating
local CO2 concentrations. Lieffering et al.9 grew rice in a FACE
experiment more representative of standard ﬁeld conditions and found no
effect of elevated [CO2] on nutrients other than nitrogen. These authors
suggested that previous signiﬁcant results may be due to unintentional
nutrient limitation caused by growing plants in pots. Several subsequent
FACE experiments did ﬁnd decreased nutrient concentrations associated
with elevated [CO2] in soybean10, sorghum10, potatoes11, wheat12--14,
and barley15, but many of these studies lacked the sample sizes
necessary to determine whether potentially meaningful differences were
signiﬁcant. Myers et al.16 grew and analyzed samples of rice (Oryza
sativa, 18 cultivars), wheat (Triticum aestivum, 8 cultivars), maize
(Zea mays, 2 cultivars), soybeans (Glycine max, 7 cultivars), ﬁeld peas
(Pisum sativum, 5 cultivars), and sorghum (Sorghum bicolor, 1 cultivar)
under ambient versus elevated [CO2] in FACE experiments between
1998--2010. Ambient [CO2] was between 364--386 ppm and elevated [CO2]
was between 546--586 ppm across all study sites, consistent with the
lower end of global [CO2] predictions for the next 40--60 years17. We
reported nutrient concentrations of the edible portions of these crops,
and found that elevated [CO2] decreased many of their zinc, iron, and
sometimes protein concentrations16. These effects varied among plant
functional types, with C3 grasses and legumes consistently affected and
C4 plants less so. Effects on nutrient concentrations varied among
different cultivars of the same crop species. Both large-scale (e.g.,
C3/C4 photosynthetic pathways) and small-scale (intraspeciﬁc)
differences in plant physiology contribute to the effects observed.
Interestingly, effects of elevated [CO2] also differed among 12
nutrients measured, indicating mechanisms more complex than carbohydrate
dilution18,19. This study improved on previous work by using more crops,
larger sample sizes, and FACE methods more representative of ﬁeld
conditions than older techniques such as open-topped chambers or fully
enclosed growth chambers, resulting in over tenfold more samples than
were previously available16, though see Loladze20. Here we report the
raw data presented by Myers et al.16 for use in further studies on the
role of atmospheric [CO2] and other cultivation conditions on the
nutrient content of food crops. While some aggregated data have been
presented concerning agronomic response to elevated [CO2]13,14,21,22, we
report cultivation conditions including water availability, fertilizer
application, temperature, and growing season length, along with the
nutrient concentrations of edible portions of crops. We also report
edible tissue concentrations of phytic acid, a compound that has been
shown to inhibit absorption of zinc and other nutrients in mammalian
guts, and is mathematically related to bioavailable zinc uptake through
the Miller equation23. These data are expected to permit detailed
analysis of the roles of cultivation conditions, including [CO2], on
crop plants' nutritional content, as well as more basic studies of their
biochemistry that may include numerous nutrients simultaneously. This
information will help identify threats to the health of billions of
people worldwide who rely on these crops for essential nutrients. It
will also provide insights about how to address these threats, for
instance, by revealing which cultivars are more likely to provide more
nutrition under elevated [CO2], thereby informing future crop breeding
efforts.

Methods Cultivation Crops were grown in FACE experiments with paired
designs, such that samples grown at ambient [CO2] (approximately 380
ppm) could be compared with samples grown under identical conditions
except that [CO2] was elevated to approximately 550 ppm during daylight
hours (during both day and night in the case of sorghum, and elevated to
approximately 580 ppm, or 200 ppm above ambient, in the case of rice).
More recent work has suggested that elevating [CO2] 24 h d − 1 may give
a more complete picture of the effects of climate change on plant
physiology and biochemistry24. Many of these experiments also tested
other variables, such as cultivar, irrigation, nitrogen application, and
temperature. Detailed agronomic methods are available for wheat25,
soybean26, maize27, sorghum28, rice29, and ﬁeld peas25. The following
descriptions outline the experimental designs for each crop, which
underlie the structure of the data we present.

SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150036 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36

2

www.nature.com/sdata/

Wheat Wheat samples (Triticum aestivum) were grown in Horsham, Victoria,
Australia between 2007--2009. In 2007 and 2008, cultivars Yitpi and Janz
were grown under full factorial manipulations of daytime [CO2] (ambient
or elevated), irrigation (rainfed only or supplemental irrigation), and
time of sowing (early or late), with four replicates per cultivar per
year. Crops sown early, consistent with local practice, experience a
cool, wet early season and a warmer, drier, late season. Late time of
sowing was used to simulate predicted climate change more holistically
by moving the growing season toward warmer and drier conditions. For
cultivar Yitpi, these treatments were crossed further with a nitrogen
(N) fertilizer treatment, with some plants receiving N fertilizer and
others receiving none; cultivar Janz received no N fertilizer.
Superphosphate was drilled with the seed at sowing at 7--9 kg P ha − 1
and 8--11 kg S ha − 1 each year, according to local practice. In 2009,
this experiment was continued for cultivars Yitpi and Janz, and six more
cultivars (Drysdale, Gladius, H45, Hartog, Silverstar, and Zebu) were
added and exposed to the same treatments as Janz, again with four
replicates per cultivar. Additional samples of cultivar Yitpi were grown
in Walpeup, Victoria, Australia (details published21) in 2008 and 2009.
Time of sowing (early or late) and daytime [CO2] (ambient or elevated)
were crossed in a full factorial design with four replicates per
treatment per year. All plants received some supplemental irrigation in
one season to avoid total crop loss to drought, and none received N
fertilizer, as pre-sowing soil nitrate concentrations were high.
Superphosphate was drilled at sowing at rates of 9 kg P ha − 1 and 11 kg
S ha − 1 each year. Rainfall, temperature, and other meteorological
conditions were recorded daily using automatic weather stations. Several
papers analyzing these data have been published13,14,21,22. Soybean
Soybean (Glycine max) was grown in Champaign, Illinois, USA between
2001--2008. The only growth condition manipulated was daytime [CO2]
(ambient or elevated); plants received neither irrigation nor
fertilizer. The choice of cultivars varied among years. In 2001, 2002,
and 2004, seven cultivars were planted: Clark, Dwight, Flyer, Loda,
Pana, Spencer, and Williams. In 2006 and 2007, only cultivar Pana was
planted, and in 2008, only cultivars Pana and Loda were planted. In
every case, samples were grown and collected from four replicates per
cultivar per year. In most cases, precipitation was recorded for the
entire growing season. For the 2002 soybean crop, precipitation data
were available for May 15 to September 30, but the growing season was
June 1 to October 16. The presented precipitation value is total
precipitation from June 1 to September 30; it may be more accurate to
add the additional 40.5 mm of precipitation from May 15--31 to
compensate for the lack of precipitation data for October 1--16. Maize
Maize (Zea mays) was grown in Champaign, Illinois, USA in 2008. The two
commercial hybrids Cv34B43 (Pioneer Hi-Bred International) and DKC61--19
(Dekalb) were both subjected to full factorial combinations of daytime
[CO2] (ambient or elevated) and nitrogen fertilizer (present or absent),
with four replicates per treatment per hybrid. Maize did not receive any
irrigation. Although the hybrids used are not cultivars in the technical
sense, we refer to them as cultivars elsewhere in this paper and dataset
for simplicity. Sorghum Sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) was grown in Maricopa,
Arizona, USA in 1998 and 1999. Atmospheric [CO2] (ambient or elevated 24
h d − 1) and irrigation (low or high) treatments were varied in a full
factorial design with four replicates per treatment per year. All crops
received roughly equal applications of nitrogen and phosphorus
fertilizer in both years. Rice Rice (Oryza sativa) was grown in
Shizukuishi, Iwate, Japan in 2007 and 2008, and in Tsukubamirai,
Ibaraki, Japan, in 2010. Rice ﬁelds in both sites were ﬂooded for most
of the growing season consistent with local practices. In 2007, three
replicates of cultivar Akitakomachi were grown in Shizukuishi in a full
factorial experiment crossing daytime [CO2] (ambient or elevated by
approximately 200 ppm30) and temperature (normal, or elevated 2 °C by
heating cables installed on the submerged soil surface31). In 2008, the
2007 experiment was repeated, and three replicates each of cultivars
Koshihikari and Takanari were grown under ambient or elevated daytime
[CO2] at normal (unmodiﬁed) temperatures. All rice grown in Shizukuishi
received NPK fertilizer consistent with local practices. A more complex
rice experiment was grown in Tsukubamirai in 2010. Experimental
variables included daytime [CO2] (ambient or elevated by approximately
200 ppm32), nitrogen application (none, standard, or increased 50--100%
above standard levels), and temperature (ambient or elevated 2 °C by
heating cables installed on the submerged soil surface31). There were
four replicates per cultivar per treatment combination, but while
daytime [CO2] was varied within each treatment, the rest of the design
was not fully factorial. For 14 cultivars, only daytime [CO2] was varied
and temperature was not manipulated. Of these, cultivars Aikoku,
Akidawara, Akihikari, Akita63, Akitakomachi, and Norin8 received
standard N application and cultivars Bekoaoba, Hoshiaoba, IR72,
Hokuriku193, Lemont, Milyang23, Momiroman, and Nipponbare received
increased N application. Cultivar Takanari was grown SCIENTIFIC DATA |
2:150036 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36

3

www.nature.com/sdata/

at ambient temperature under fully crossed daytime [CO2] and nitrogen
(standard and increased) treatments. Cultivar SY63 was grown with
standard N applications under fully crossed daytime [CO2] and
temperature (ambient or increased) treatments. For cultivars 86Y8 and
Koshihikari, all three variables (daytime [CO2], nitrogen, and
temperature) were manipulated. Cultivar 86Y8 received only standard and
increased N applications, while Koshihikari received zero, standard, and
increased N applications. Samples of these two cultivars receiving
standard N application were exposed to both ambient and increased
temperature treatments, with other N treatments being grown only at
ambient temperature. Increased N application levels were 100% above
standard for all cultivars except Koshihikari, for which increased N
applications were 50% above standard levels. All rice grown in
Tsukubamirai received phosphorus and potassium fertilizer consistent
with local practices.

Field peas Field peas were grown in Horsham, Victoria, Australia in a
full factorial experiment crossing daytime [CO2] (ambient or elevated)
with supplemental irrigation (present or absent). Eight replicates of
each of ﬁve cultivars (Bohatyr, Kaspa, OZP0601, OZP0902, and Sturt) were
grown in 2010. Plants did not receive nitrogen fertilizer, but received
superphosphate at rates of 9 kg P ha − 1 and 11 kg S ha − 1. Elemental
analysis Samples of the edible portions of each crop were dried and
ground for elemental analysis. Nitrogen concentration of soybeans,
maize, sorghum, rice, and peas was determined by ﬂash combustion coupled
with thermal conductivity/IR detection of the resulting N2, NOx, and CO2
gases on a LECO TruSpec CN Analyzer33. Nitrogen concentration of wheat
was measured by a similar technique on a LECO TruMac calibrated with
EDTA34. Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy
(ICP-OES) was used to measure sample P, K, S, B, Ca, Mg, Zn, Mn, Fe, and
Cu concentrations. Wheat samples were prepared by sample digestion in
nitric acid35. Samples of all other crops were digested by microwave
heating in closed vessels with nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide. All
nutrient concentrations are reported at 0% grain moisture concentration.
Phytic acid analysis Phytic acid concentrations in the edible portions
of crops were determined using a modiﬁcation of the method of Haug and
Lantzsch (1983; hereafter referred to as the ‘HL' method)36. This method
takes advantage of the ability of phytic acid to precipitate iron from a
solution and consists of two basic steps. First, extracts containing
phytic acid are incubated with solutions with known iron concentration.
Following precipitation of iron phytate, the iron remaining in solution
is quantitated. To determine phytic acid in tissue extracts, the results
are compared with those obtained using a phytic acid standard curve. We
express phytic acid as its phosphorus content (phytic acid phosphorus).
One can convert phytic acid phosphorus to phytic acid by multiplying by
3.548. Tissue samples were stored in a desiccator until analysis. If the
samples received were whole grains, they were ﬁrst milled to pass 40
mesh. For the iron precipitation step, 50 mg of tissue were extracted in
1.0 ml of extraction media (0.2 M HCL:10% Na2SO4) in 1.5 ml Eppendorf
tubes overnight at 4 °C with shaking. Extracts were centrifuged (4,500
RCF, 20 min). The iron precipitations were set up as follows. A 25 μl
aliquot of extract was placed in a second Eppendorf tube, to which was
added 225 μl of extraction media and 500 μl of iron solution (0.2 gm
Ammonium iron (III) sulfate dodecahydrate dissolved in 1.0 L 0.2 N HCl).
A phytic acid phosphorus standard curve was set up similarly except that
instead of aliquots of extract, 25 μl aliquots of phytic acid standards
(see below) were used, to give from 0.625 to 12.5 μg phytic acid P per
assay (Fig. 1). All tubes were then placed in a boiling water bath for
30 min, cooled to room temperature, and centrifuged (4,500 RCF:20 min).
Aliquots (100 μl) of precipitation supernatant were pipetted into
microtitre plate wells and 150 μl of ‘HL reagent' (5.0 g 2,2'-bipyridine
and 5.0 ml thioglycolic acid dissolved in 500 ml distilled water) was
added. The plates were then read on a microtitre plate spectrophotometer
at 510 nm. Duplicate extractions were conducted for each tissue sample
and for each extraction, duplicate precipitations were conducted. The
colorimetric assay of precipitation supernatant was conducted in
triplicate. If the mean values obtained for the two extractions of a
given tissue sample were not within 15% agreement, a third extraction
was conducted, and the two values in best agreement were used to
calculate sample mean. The phytic acid standard curve was prepared using
commercially-obtained phytic acid (Sigma): a phytic acid dodecasodium
salt hydrate. A stock solution of 100 ml of 1.0 mg phytic acid P ml − 1
was prepared as follows: 549.9 mg Sigma phytic acid dodecasodium salt
hydrate was dissolved into either 100 ml of 0.8 N HCl or 100 ml of 0.2 N
HCl [(1.0 mg PAP/ml)(100 ml)(1022.8 g phytic acid dodecasodium salt
hydrate/186 g PAP) = 549.9 mg phytic acid dodecasodium salt hydrate per
100 ml]. These 1.0 mg ml − 1 stocks were then used to prepare standard
solutions that are 25, 50, 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500 μg phytic acid P
ml − 1.

Data Records The dataset (Data Citation 1) is structured such that each
row contains all of our data from a single plant sample, with columns
representing growing conditions and resulting nutrient concentrations.
Cells SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150036 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36

4

www.nature.com/sdata/

Absorbacne 510

0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

Phytic Acid ( g per assay reaction)

Figure 1. A typical standard curve used to assay phytic acid using the
HL method. The known concentrations of phytic acid standards are plotted
against their absorbance at 510 nm after sample processing. Please see
text for details.

marked ‘NA' indicate missing, unavailable, or inapplicable data. Column
variable deﬁnitions are provided in Table 1 (available online only).

Technical Validation Elemental analysis Element concentration
measurements were validated in two ways. First, experimental samples
were interspersed with standard reference materials of known element
concentrations, whose measured concentrations were conﬁrmed to be within
their certiﬁed acceptable ranges. Second, for most crops, every tenth
sample was run in duplicate to ensure consistency; fewer than 5% of
element concentration measurements in duplicated samples differed by
more than 10%. For wheat samples, every 25th sample was run in
duplicate. All results were different by less than 10%, and the series
was reanalyzed if duplicates differed by more than 5%. Phytic acid
analysis The following procedures were used to test the accuracy and
reproducibility of the phytic acid assay method used here. We ﬁrst
veriﬁed the concentration of the commercially-obtained phytic acid
(Sigma) used to prepare the phytic acid standard curve. This reagent is
a phytic acid dodecasodium salt hydrate, with a dodecasodium salt
formula weight of 923.8, and a water content of 5.5 moles H2O per mole
phytic acid. This product would then be 90.3% phytic acid dodecasodium
salt with a phytic acid dodecasodium•H2O formula weight of 1022.8. To
conﬁrm this, two standard solutions were prepared with this product and
were assayed six times, using the ‘ferric precipitation' assay described
below, and found to be within 2% of the predicted value, based on the
above assumptions. Care was also taken to determine where the phytic
acid standard curves produced from this reagent are linear for each
method (Fig. 1). Eight tissue standards with greatly varying levels of
endogenous phytic acid were used as controls to indicate accuracy and
reliability of the methods used (Table 2). One set of these eight tissue
standards were tested for every 100 samples tested. Flours were produced
using seed produced by three barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) lines37, two
maize (Zea mays L.) hybrids38, and three soybean [Glycine max L.
(Merr.)] lines39,40. Seed of the barley lines were produced by the
USDA-ARS at Aberdeen, Idaho in 2006. Seed of the maize lines were
produced for the USDA-ARS at a winter nursery station near Santiago,
Chile in the winter of 2001. Seed of the soybean line CX183 was kindly
provided by Seedomics Hybrid Corn Inc. (Forest, IN) and were produced in
Indiana in the summer of 2002. Seed of the soybean lines Jack and CAPPA
were produced at the University of Missouri, Columbia, in 2008. The
lines included as tissue standards in this study either produced seed
with phytic acid levels typical of crops produced today or with reduced
seed phytic acid due to either low phytic acid (lpa) genotype or genetic
engineering to over-express the enzyme phytase in seeds. The ‘normal
phytic acid' lines were the barley cv. Harrington (the genetic
background in which the lpa genotypes included in this study were
isolated), a maize hybrid produced by crossing the public inbred lines
A632 and A619 (the ‘near-isogenic' hybrid for the A631XA619 lpa1-1
included in this study), and the soybean cultivar ‘Jack' (the control
for the lpa CX183 and the ‘high phytase' ‘CAPPA', respectively). The
‘reduced phytic acid' lines were the genotypes barley lpa1-1 and barley
lpa-M955, each in the Harrington background, maize lpa1-1 as a A632XA619
isohybrid, soybean CX183, and the genetically-engineered soybean line
‘CAPPA', in which a bacterial phytase is overexpressed in developing
seed. To calibrate the level of phytic acid in seed produced by these
lines, these tissue standards were analyzed for phytic acid phosphorus
using two methods previously shown to be highly accurate and SCIENTIFIC
DATA | 2:150036 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36

5

www.nature.com/sdata/

Species

Line

Phytic Acid P Ferric. Precip. (mg g − 1)

HPLC (mg g − 1)

HL Method (mg g − 1 ± s.d.)

1.99

2.71

2.55 ± 0.32

Barley

Harrington

Barley

lpa1-1-M422

1.05

1.17

1.08 ± 0.21

Barley

lpa-M955

0.15

0.15

0.25 ± 0.11

Maize

Normal-WT

2.73

3.86

3.68 ± 0.46

Maize

lpa1-1

1.2

1.65

1.36 ± 0.21 4.68 ± 0.25

Soybean

Jack

4.21

4.95

Soybean

CX-183

1.42

1.45

1.28 ± 0.23

Soybean

CAPPA

0.48

0.38

0.17 ± 0.06

0.16 (n = 3)

0.07 (n = 3)

0.12 (n = 5)

Standard Deviation of the Mean

Table 2. Validation of phytic acid phosphorus measurements. Phytic acid
phosphorus in samples used as tissue controls as determined using the
‘ferric precipitation method,' HPLC, or the HL method used in the FACE
analyses in the Raboy lab. (s.d. = Standard Deviation).

reproducible; the ‘ferric precipitation' method38 and a high pressure
liquid chromatography (HPLC) method (analyses kindly provided by Dr
Sören Rasmussen, University of Copenhagen, Denmark). The ferric
precipitation method assays total, acid-soluble inositol phosphates,
referred to here as phytic acid P38,41. Previous HPLC analyses indicate
that in most genotypes >90% of total seed inositol phosphate consists of
phytic acid (inositol hexakisphosphate), with the remainder consisting
of less highly phosphorylated inositol phosphates such as inositol
tetrakisphosphate or pentakisphosphate37. Thus use of the term ‘phytic
acid P' for total inositol phosphate is accurate in most cases. Aliquots
of tissue (0.5 gm) were extracted in 0.4 M HCl:0.7 M Na2SO4 by shaking
overnight at 4 °C. Following centrifugation (10,000 g for 10 min) and
ﬁltering through Whatman #1, phytic acid P in 10 ml of supernatant was
obtained as a ferric precipitate, wet-ashed and assayed for P
colorimetrically. Phytic acid P is expressed in terms of its P (atomic
weight 31) content to facilitate comparisons between seed P fractions
and methods of determination. All assays were conducted in triplicate.
For determination of ﬂour phytic acid P using HPLC, ﬂour samples (40 mg)
were extracted in 1.6 ml 0.5 M HCl (30% Suprapur, Merck) by shaking
overnight at 4 °C. Following centrifugation (10,000 g for 10 min)
supernatants were ﬁltered through a 0.45 μm syringe ﬁlter (Pall Life
Sciences). Aliquots of ﬁltered extract (100 μl) were fractionated via
ion-exchange chromatography using a chemically inert HPLC system 10Avp
series (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a CarboPac PA-100 column
(Dionex). Phytic acid peaks were detected post-column as described by
Bohn et al.42 following the protocol of Carlsson et al.43, and
quantitated via comparison with a standard curve prepared using reagent
grade phytic acid (Sigma). The range of quantiﬁcation was 1 to 30 nmol
phytic acid per 100 μl sample injected. All assays were conducted in
triplicate. The accuracy and reproducibility of the ‘HL' method used
here is illustrated by comparing the means and Standard Deviation of the
Means (‘Standard Errors') obtained in an HL method run with that
obtained with these other two methods (Table 2).

References 1. Tulchinsky, T. H. Micronutrient deﬁciency conditions:
global health issues. Public Health Reviews 32, 243--255 (2010). 2.
Caulﬁeld, L. E., Black, R. E. in Comparative Quantiﬁcation of Health
Risks: Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected
Major Risk Factors (eds Ezzati M., Lopez A. D., Rodgers A. & Murray C.
J. L.) 1 (World Health Organization, 2004). 3. Stoltzfus, R. J.,
Mullany, L., Black, R. E. in Comparative Quantiﬁcation of Health Risks:
Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major
Risk Factors (eds Ezzati M., Lopez A. D., Rodgers A. & Murray C. J. L.)
1 (World Health Organization, 2004). 4. la Puente, de, L. S., Perez, P.
P., Martinez-Carrasco, R., Morcuende, R. M. & del Molino, I. M. M.
Action of elevated CO2 and high temperatures on the mineral chemical
composition of two varieties of wheat. Agrochimica 44, 221--230 (2000).
5. Manderscheid, R., Bender, J., Jäger, H.-J. & Weigel, H. J. Effects of
season long CO2 enrichment on cereals. II. Nutrient concentrations and
grain quality. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 54, 175--185
(1995). 6. Fangmeier, A., Grüters, U., Högy, P., Vermehren, B. & Jäger,
H.-J. Effects of elevated CO2, nitrogen supply and tropospheric ozone on
spring wheat-II. Nutrients (N, P, K, S, Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn, Zn).
Environmental Pollution 96, 43--59 (1997). 7. Pleijel, H. et al. Effects
of elevated carbon dioxide, ozone and water availability on spring wheat
growth and yield. Physiologia Plantarum 108, 61--70 (2000). 8.
Seneweera, S. P. & Conroy, J. P. Growth, grain yield and quality of rice
(Oryza sativa L.) in response to elevated CO2 and phosphorus nutrition.
Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 43, 1131--1136 (1997). 9. Lieffering,
M., Kim, H.-Y., Kobayashi, K. & Okada, M. The impact of elevated CO2 on
the elemental concentrations of ﬁeld-grown rice grains. Field Crops
Research 88, 279--286 (2004). 10. Prior, S. A., Runion, G. B., Rogers,
H. H. & Torbert, H. A. Effects of atmospheric CO2 enrichment on crop
nutrient dynamics under no-till conditions. Journal of Plant Nutrition
31, 758--773 (2008). 11. Högy, P. & Fangmeier, A. Atmospheric CO2
enrichment affects potatoes: 2. Tuber quality traits. European Journal
of Agronomy 30, 85--94 (2009).

SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150036 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36

6

www.nature.com/sdata/

12. Högy, P. et al. Effects of elevated CO2 on grain yield and quality
    of wheat: results from a 3-year free-air CO2 enrichment experiment.
    Plant Biology 11, 60--69 (2009).
13. Fernando, N. et al. Elevated CO2 alters grain quality of two bread
    wheat cultivars grown under different environmental conditions.
    Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 185, 24--33 (2014).
14. Fernando, N. et al. Intra-speciﬁc variation of wheat grain quality
    in response to elevated [CO2] at two sowing times under rain-fed and
    irrigation treatments. Journal of Cereal Science 59, 137--144
    (2014).
15. Erbs, M. et al. Effects of free-air CO2 enrichment and nitrogen
    supply on grain quality parameters and elemental composition of
    wheat and barley grown in a crop rotation. Agriculture, Ecosystems
    and Environment 136, 59--68 (2010).
16. Myers, S. S. et al. Increasing CO2 threatens human nutrition. Nature
    510, 139--142 (2014).
17. Fisher, B. S. et al. in Climate Change 2007: Mitigation.
    Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of
    the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (eds Metz, B.,
    Davidson, O. R., Bosch, P. R., Dave, R., Meyer, L. A.) (Cambridge
    University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2007).
18. Gifford, R. M., Barrett, D. J. & Lutze, J. L. The effects of
    elevated [CO2] on the C: N and C: P mass ratios of plant tissues.
    Plant Soil 224, 1--14 (2000).
19. McGrath, J. M. & Lobell, D. B. Reduction of transpiration and
    altered nutrient allocation contribute to nutrient decline of crops
    grown in elevated CO2 concentrations. Plant, Cell & Environment 36,
    697--705 (2013).
20. Loladze, I. Hidden shift of the ionome of plants exposed to elevated
    CO2 depletes minerals at the base of human nutrition. elife 3,
    e02245 (2014).
21. Fernando, N. et al. Rising atmospheric CO2 concentration affects
    mineral nutrient and protein concentration of wheat grain. Food
    Chemistry 133, 1307--1311 (2012).
22. Fernando, N. et al. Wheat grain quality under increasing atmospheric
    CO2 concentrations in a semi-arid cropping system. Journal of Cereal
    Science 56, 684--690 (2012).
23. Miller, L. V., Krebs, N. F. & Hambidge, K. M. A mathematical model
    of zinc absorption in humans as a function of dietary zinc and
    phytate. Journal of Nutrition 137, 135--141 (2007).
24. Asensio, J. S. R., Rachmilevitch, S. & Bloom, A. J. Responses of
    Arabidopsis and wheat to rising CO2 depend on nitrogen source and
    nighttime CO2 levels. Plant Physiology 168, 156--163 (2015).
25. Mollah, M., Norton, R. & Huzzey, J. Australian grains free-air
    carbon dioxide enrichment (AGFACE) facility: design and performance.
    Crop and Pasture Science 60, 697 (2009).
26. Gillespie, K. M. et al. Greater antioxidant and respiratory
    metabolism in ﬁeld-grown soybean exposed to elevated O3 under both
    ambient and elevated CO2. Plant, Cell & Environment 35, 169--184
    (2011).
27. Markelz, R. J. C., Strellner, R. S. & Leakey, A. D. B. Impairment of
    C4 photosynthesis by drought is exacerbated by limiting nitrogen and
    ameliorated by elevated [CO2] in maize. Journal of Experimental
    Botany 62, 3235--3246 (2011).
28. Ottman, M. J. et al. Elevated CO2 increases sorghum biomass under
    drought conditions. New Phytologist 150, 261--273 (2001).
29. Hasegawa, T. et al. Rice cultivar responses to elevated CO2 at two
    free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE) sites in Japan. Functional Plant
    Biology 40, 148 (2013).
30. Okada, M. et al. Free‐air CO2 enrichment (FACE) using pure CO2
    injection: system description. New Phytologist 150, 251--260 (2001).
31. Adachi, M. et al. Soil and water warming accelerates phenology and
    down-regulation of leaf photosynthesis of rice plants grown under
    free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE). Plant and Cell Physiology 55,
    370--380 (2014).
32. Nakamura, H. et al. Performance of the enlarged rice-FACE system
    using pure CO2 installed in Tsukuba, Japan. Journal of Agricultural
    Meteorology 68, 15--23 (2012).
33. 972.43, A. O. M. in Ofﬁcial Methods of Analysis of AOAC
    International 18th edn. Revision 1, 2006 Ch. 12, 5--6 (AOAC
    International, 2006).
34. Panozzo, J. F. et al. Elevated carbon dioxide changes grain protein
    concentration and composition and compromises baking quality. A FACE
    study. Journal of Cereal Science 60, 461--470 (2014).
35. Zarcinas, B. A., Cartwright, B. & Spouncer, L. R. Nitric acid
    digestion and multi‐element analysis of plant material by
    inductively coupled plasma spectrometry. Communications in Soil
    Science & Plant Analysis 18, 131--146 (1987).
36. Haug, W. & Lantzsch, H.-J. Sensitive method for the rapid
    determination of phytate in cereals and cereal products. Journal of
    the Science of Food and Agriculture 34, 1423--1426 (1983).
37. Dorsch, J. A. et al. Seed phosphorus and inositol phosphate
    phenotype of barley low phytic acid genotypes. Phytochemistry 62,
    691--706 (2003).
38. Raboy, V. et al. Origin and seed phenotype of maize low phytic acid
    1-1 and low phytic acid 2-1. Plant Physiology 124, 355--368 (2000).
39. Wilcox, J. R., Premachandra, G. S., Young, K. A. & Raboy, V.
    Isolation of high seed inorganic P, low-phytate soybean mutants.
    Crop Science 40, 1601--1605 (2000).
40. Bilyeu, K. D. et al. Quantitative conversion of phytate to inorganic
    phosphorus in soybean seeds expressing a bacterial phytase. Plant
    Physiology 146, 468--477 (2008).
41. Raboy, V., Dickinson, D. B. & Below, F. E. Variation in seed total
    phosphorus, phytic acid, zinc, calcium, magnesium, and protein among
    lines of Glycine max and G. soja. Crop Science 24, 431--434 (1984).
42. Bohn, L., Josefsen, L., Meyer, A. S. & Rasmussen, S. K. Quantitative
    analysis of phytate globoids isolated from wheat bran and
    characterization of their sequential dephosphorylation by wheat
    phytase. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 55, 7547--7552
    (2007).
43. Carlsson, N.-G., Bergman, E.-L., Skoglund, E., Hasselblad, K. &
    Sandberg, A.-S. Rapid analysis of inositol phosphates. Journal of
    Agricultural and Food Chemistry 49, 1695--1701 (2001).

Data Citation 1. Dietterich, L. H. et al. Figshare
http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.ﬁgshare.1399218 (2015).

Acknowledgements We thank H. Nakamura, T. Tokida, and C. Zhu for
contributions to the RiceFACE project. We thank the following for
ﬁnancial support of this work: the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; the
Winslow Foundation; the Commonwealth Department of Agriculture
(Australia), the International Plant Nutrition Institute, (Australia),
the Grains Research and Development Corporation (Australia), the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (Japan); the National
Science Foundation (NSF IOS-13-58675); USDA NIFA 2008-35100-044459;
research at SoyFACE was supported by the US Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service, which also provided support via the Small
Grains and Potato Research Unit, Aberdeen ID; Illinois Council for Food
and Agricultural Research (CFAR); Department of Energy's SCIENTIFIC DATA
| 2:150036 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36

7

www.nature.com/sdata/

Ofﬁce of Science (BER) Midwestern Regional Center of the National
Institute for Climatic Change Research at Michigan Technological
University, under Award Number DEFC02- 06ER64158; and the National
Research Initiative of Agriculture and Food Research Initiative
Competitive Grants Program Grant no. 2010-65114-20343 from the USDA
National Institute of Food and Agriculture. Early stages of this work
received support from Harvard Catalyst | The Harvard Clinical and
Translational Science Center (National Center for Research Resources and
the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National
Institutes of Health Award 8UL1TR000170-05). Samuel S. Myers had full
access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.

Author Contributions LHD assisted with data collection and analysis and
drafted the manuscript. AZ, IK, JS, and PH performed statistical
analyses. PH and ABDL assisted with research methodology. AJB and EC
analyzed maize, soybean, rice, ﬁeld pea, and sorghum grain samples for
nutrient content. VR analyzed grain samples for phytic acid content. RN
designed the research for the AGFACE sites, including project
conception. RN and GF developed research plans and undertook oversight
of the AGFACE project. SS and NF conducted the research on grain
nutrient concentrations from the AGFACE sites and collated and analyzed
the primary data. TH, HS, YU, and SY performed rice FACE experiments and
supplied grain for analysis. RLN conducted soybean and maize FACE
experiments and supplied grain for analysis. MJO conducted sorghum FACE
experiments and supplied grain for analysis. NMH and PH provided
substantial input into experimental design. KAS assisted with data
collection and analysis. SSM conceived the overall project. All authors
contributed to preparing the manuscript.

Additional Information Table 1 is only available in the online version
of this paper. Competing ﬁnancial interests: The authors declare no
competing ﬁnancial interests. How to cite this article: Dietterich, L.
H. et al. Impacts of elevated atmospheric CO2 on nutrient content of
important food crops. Sci. Data 2:150036 doi: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36
(2015). This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article's Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included
under the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission
from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of
this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0 Metadata
associated with this Data Descriptor is available at
http://www.nature.com/sdata/ and is released under the CC0 waiver to
maximize reuse.

SCIENTIFIC DATA | 2:150036 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2015.36

8


