*Prenatal and Early Life Exposure to Traffic Pollution and
Cardiometabolic Health in Childhood *

Abby F. Fleisch^{1}, Heike Luttmann-Gibson^{2}, Wei Perng^{3}, Sheryl L.
Rifas-Shiman^{4}, Brent A. Coull^{5}, Itai Kloog^{6}, Petros
Koutrakis^{2}, Joel D. Schwartz^{2}, Antonella Zanobetti^{2}, Christos
S. Mantzoros^{7}, Matthew W. Gillman^{4,8}, Diane R. Gold^{2,9}, Emily
Oken^{4,8}

*Affliliations*

^{1}Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA

^{2}Department of Environmental Health, Harvard TH Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA

^{3}Department of Nutritional Sciences, Department of Epidemiology,
University of Michigan School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

^{4}Obesity Prevention Program, Department of Population Medicine,
Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute,
Boston, MA, USA

^{5}Department of Biostatistics, Harvard TH Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA

^{6}Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel

^{7}Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA

^{8}Department of Nutrition, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA

^{9}Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

*Corresponding author:*

Abby F. Fleisch, MD, MPH

Department of Endocrinology

Boston Children's Hospital

300 Longwood Ave

Boston, MA 02115

[[mailto:abby.fleisch@childrens.harvard.edu][abby.fleisch@childrens.harvard.edu]]

Phone: 617-355-7476, FAX: 617-730-0194

*Running title:* Traffic Pollution and Childhood Cardiometabolic Health

*Key words:* Adiposity, air pollution, cardiometabolic health, PM_{2.5},
pregnancy, traffic

*Abbreviations:* BC, black carbon; BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence
interval; HOMA-IR, homeostasis model assessment for insulin resistance;
LMP, last menstrual period; PM_{2.5}, fine particulate matter; RAs,
research assistants; SD, standard deviation; SES, socioeconomic status;
SS, subscapular; TR, triceps; UFP, ultrafine particles

*\\
*

*ABSTRACT*

*Background:* Prenatal exposure to traffic pollution has been associated
with faster infant weight gain, but implications for cardiometabolic
health in later childhood are unknown.\\
*Methods:* Among 1,418 children in Project Viva, a Boston-area pre-birth
cohort, we assessed anthropometric and biochemical parameters of
cardiometabolic health in early (median age 3.3 years) and mid- (median
age 7.7 years) childhood. We used spatiotemporal models to estimate
prenatal and early life residential PM_{2.5} and black carbon exposure
as well as traffic density and roadway proximity. We performed linear
regression analyses adjusted for sociodemographics

*Results:* Children whose mothers lived close to a major roadway at the
time of delivery had higher markers of adverse cardiometabolic risk in
early and mid-childhood. For example, total fat mass was 2.1kg (95%CI:
0.8, 3.5) higher in mid-childhood for children of mothers who lived < 50
m vs. ≥ 200m from a major roadway. Black carbon exposure and traffic
density were generally not associated with cardiometabolic parameters,
and PM_{2.5} exposure during the year prior was paradoxically associated
with improved cardiometabolic profile

*Conclusions:* Infants whose mothers lived close to a major roadway at
the time of delivery may be at later risk for adverse cardiometabolic
health.*\\
*

*INTRODUCTION*

Childhood obesity is epidemic, recalcitrant to treatment, and associated
with costly comorbidities, including adverse cardiometabolic health that
tracks into adulthood.[[#_ENREF_1][^{1}]] The prenatal and early life
environment influences propensity for excess
adiposity,[[#_ENREF_2][^{2}]] and it is a priority to identify
remediable early life environmental triggers.

Air pollution is one environmental exposure that may promote adiposity.
After release from automobiles and power plants, gaseous and particulate
air pollutants with an aerodynamic diameter less than 2.5μm (PM_{2.5})
enter the airways and may induce adiposity and dysmetabolism through
endothelial dysfunction, inflammation, and oxidative
stress.[[#_ENREF_3][^{3}]] In rodents, PM_{2.5} exposure altered
adipokine secretion and increased adipose inflammation, visceral
adiposity, and insulin resistance.[[#_ENREF_4][^{4}]]^{,}
[[#_ENREF_5][^{5}]]

Despite a convincing rodent literature, there has been limited
investigation of PM_{2.5} on cardiometabolic health in human studies.
Prior cohorts have demonstrated an association between air pollution
exposure and obesity in childhood[[#_ENREF_6][^{6-9}]] but included
limited investigation of adipose distribution and no consideration of
cardiometabolic biomarkers. Population-based studies in
children[[#_ENREF_10][^{10-12}]] and adults[[#_ENREF_13][^{13}]] have
linked air pollution exposure with insulin resistance but lacked
consideration of prenatal exposures despite emerging evidence that /in
utero/ air pollution exposure may prime offspring for
adiposity.[[#_ENREF_8][^{8}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_14][^{14}]] Late prenatal
exposure to traffic pollution was associated with faster infant weight
gain in our prior analysis of the Boston-area Project Viva
cohort,[[#_ENREF_14][^{14}]] but whether these weight-promoting effects
persist throughout childhood and whether exposure is also associated
with adverse cardiometabolic health in childhood is unclear.

In the present analysis, our primary objective was to evaluate the
extent to which late prenatal exposure to PM_{2.5} and black carbon (BC)
(a traffic-related PM_{2.5} component), as well as residential traffic
density and roadway proximity, were associated with anthropometric and
biochemical markers of adiposity and insulin resistance in early and
mid-childhood. We also evaluated postnatal, proximate pollution
exposures. We hypothesized that air pollution exposure would be
associated with an adverse cardiometabolic profile.

*METHODS*

/*Study population and design*/

Participants were recruited to Project Viva, a prospective cohort study
of prenatal exposures and offspring health, from 1999 to 2002 during
their first prenatal visit to Atrius Health in eastern
Massachusetts.[[#_ENREF_15][^{15}]] Of 2,128 participants with a live
singleton offspring, 1,418 had data for at least one exposure and one
outcome studied. We included a subset in each analysis based primarily
on available outcome data (Figure S1). As compared to those without
follow-up, mothers of children who attended early and mid-childhood
visits were more likely to be nonsmokers, college graduates, and have
higher birth weight-for-gestational age infants (Table S1).

Mothers provided informed consent at enrollment and for their child at
each in-person visit. Institutional Review Boards of participating
institutions approved the study.

/*Air pollution exposures*/

Participants provided their residential address at enrollment (median
9.9 weeks gestation) and updated it at study visits at the end of the
second trimester, soon after birth, and during their child's infancy
(median: 6 months of age), early childhood (median: 3.3 years of age),
and mid-childhood (median: 7.7 years of age). Our estimates of
residential BC and PM_{2.5} exposure accounted for moves during exposure
windows of interest.

We estimated daily BC exposure with a land-use regression model (mean
“out-of-sample” ten-fold cross-validation R^{2}=
0.73).[[#_ENREF_16][^{16}]] We used aerosol optical depth data to
estimate PM_{2.5} exposure at 10x10 km spatial grid resolution (mean
daily “out-of-sample” ten-fold cross-validation R^{2}= 0.87 for days
with aerosol optical depth data and 0.85 for days
without).[[#_ENREF_17][^{17}]] [[#_ENREF_19][]] To obtain third
trimester exposure estimates, we averaged daily exposures from the
188^{th} day (i.e.---27 weeks gestation) after the last menstrual period
(LMP) to the day before birth. To obtain exposure estimates for the year
prior to the health outcome measurement, we averaged daily exposures
over 365 days prior to the in-person visit (anthropometric outcomes) or
blood draw (biomarker outcomes). We assigned exposures to addresses
where model predictions were available (Eastern Massachusetts for the BC
model and New England for the PM_{2.5} model) for at least 90% of days
in an exposure period. We also examined associations using our model for
PM_{2.5} exposure at 1x1 km spatial grid resolution,
[[#_ENREF_18][^{18}]] available after 2003. Results using this model
were similar, and because estimates were not available for prenatal time
periods, we present all results using the 10x10 km PM_{2.5} model.

We used the 2002 road inventory from the Massachusetts Executive Office
of Transportation to calculate traffic density by multiplying annual
average daily traffic (vehicles/day) by length of road (km) within 100m
of participants' residential address. We used 2005 ESRI Street Map^{TM}
North America ArcGIS 10 Data and Maps to estimate home roadway proximity
as distance to Census Feature Class Code A1 or A2 roads
(i.e.---highways).

/*Assessment of child anthropometry and cardiometabolic biomarkers*/

Research assistants (RAs) measured participants' weight in light
clothing using an electronic scale (Tanita, Arlington Heights, IL) and
height without shoes using a stadiometer (Shorr Productions, Olney, MD).
We calculated age- and sex-specific BMI z-scores from CDC 2000 reference
data. RAs used Holtain calipers (Cross-well, UK) to measure subscapular
(SS) and triceps (TR) skinfold thicknesses, and we calculated the sum
(SS + TR) of the skinfold thicknesses. RAs measured waist circumference
underneath clothing using a nonstretchable measuring tape (Hoechstmass
Balzer GmbH, Sulzbach, Germany). We measured total and truncal fat mass
using a Hologic DXA scan (Bedford, MA).

In early and mid-childhood, we measured plasma leptin and adiponectin
concentrations, and in mid-childhood, plasma fasting glucose and
insulin, as previously described.[[#_ENREF_19][^{19}]] We calculated the
homeostasis model assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) [glucose
(mg/dL) x insulin (mU/L))/405].

/*Covariates*/

We obtained mothers' age, race/ethnicity, education, and smoking habits
at study enrollment. We calculated pre-pregnancy BMI from self-reported
weight and height. Women underwent a two-tiered glucose screening test
during pregnancy, as previously described.[[#_ENREF_20][^{20}]] We
obtained infant sex, birth weight, and date of delivery from the
hospital medical record. We calculated length of gestation by LMP and
birth weight-for-gestational age and sex z-score from a US national
reference.[[#_ENREF_21][^{21}]] We abstracted residential census tract
median annual household income at the time of delivery from 2000 US
Census data.

/*Statistical analyses*/

We used linear regression to evaluate associations of air pollution
exposures with anthropometric and cardiometabolic biomarkers in early
childhood (BMI z-score, waist circumference, sum of skinfold thickness,
leptin, and adiponectin) and mid-childhood (BMI z-score, total fat mass,
truncal fat mass, leptin, adiponectin, and HOMA-IR). For outcomes
available at both time points, we examined each separately to
accommodate potential differences in confounder effects by developmental
stage. Blood concentrations of leptin, adiponectin, and HOMA-IR were not
normally distributed so we ln-transformed them for analyses. For ease of
interpretation we exponentiated resulting regression coefficients, which
we report as a percent change.

We considered each exposure (BC, PM_{2.5}, traffic density, and roadway
proximity) at each time period in separate models. To account for the
exponential spatial decay of traffic pollution,[[#_ENREF_22][^{22}]] we
/a priori/ categorized residential proximity to major roadway as
/>/200m, 100 to <200m, 50 to <100m, and <50m, as we have done
previously.[[#_ENREF_14][^{14}]] We initially modeled BC, PM_{2.5}, and
traffic density in quartiles, and because exposure--outcome
relationships appeared linear, we reported continuous measures and
expressed associations per interquartile range (IQR) increment.

We first fit unadjusted models, followed by full multivariable models
for each exposure--outcome relationship. We included covariates
potentially associated with air pollution exposure and/or childhood
cardiometabolic health: maternal age (continuous), education (with or
without college degree), and smoking habits (smoked during pregnancy,
formerly smoked, never smoked); child age (continuous), sex
(dichotomous), and race/ethnicity (white, black, Asian, Hispanic,
other); and census tract median household income (continuous). To
account for trends in air pollution and adiposity by season and over
time, we also included season (continuous sine and cosine of date) and
date (continuous) at the time of health outcome in multivariable models.
We did not include personal household income, fetal growth, or maternal
glucose tolerance because inclusion did not appreciably change results.
We substituted maternal for child race/ethnicity in 10% of participants
missing data on child race/ethnicity. 98% of participants had complete
covariate information for the multivariable models. We found no effect
modification by child sex or maternal pre-pregnancy BMI, so we present
all results without stratification or inclusion of an interaction term
for these variables.

In secondary analyses, we examined associations of BC and PM_{2.5}
exposure during other time periods [i.e. first trimester (date of LMP to
93^{rd} day after LMP), second trimester (94^{th} day after LMP to
187^{th} day after LMP), and one week prior to health outcome
assessment] with early and mid-childhood cardiometabolic health. To
account for potential bias due to cohort attrition, we repeated key
analyses of roadway proximity at delivery and cardiometabolic outcomes
using inverse probability weighting. In addition, because roadway
category sample sizes were small (Table S3) and because we occasionally
identified non-monotonic associations (Tables 2 and 3), we also
performed a penalized spline analysis using R Version 3.0.0 (R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) to evaluate
potential non-linearity across the range of roadway proximity. For all
other analyses, we used SAS version 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary NC).

*RESULTS*

/*Population characteristics*/

Mean(SD) maternal age was 32.1(5.2) years; 68% of mothers were college
graduates, and 69% were non-smokers. 64% of children were white. Details
on early and mid-childhood cardiometabolic outcomes are presented in
Table 1.

Third trimester mean(SD, range) BC concentration was 0.7µg/m^{3}(0.2,
0.1-1.6). For context, the annual US urban average ranged
0.2-1.9µg/m^{3} from 2005-2007.[[#_ENREF_23][^{23}]] Third trimester
mean(SD, range) PM_{2.5} concentration was 11.8µg/m^{3}(1.6, 7.5-16.8),
and the Environmental Protection Agency air quality standard for annual
PM_{2.5} exposure was 15µg/m^{3} during 1999-2002. At the time of
delivery, mean(SD, range) neighborhood traffic density was 1,410(1,846,
0-30,860) vehicles/day x km of road within 100m of residential address;
most mothers (88%) lived />/200m from a major roadway, and 3% lived
<50m. Expo­sures were moderately correlated (Spearman correlation
coefficients 0.10-0.64) (Table S2).

Mothers with lower 3^{rd} trimester BC exposure were more likely to be
older, educated, nonsmokers, and live in a census tract with higher
median household income. Their children were more likely to be white,
have a higher birth weight-for-gestational age, and to be younger at
follow-up visits with lower leptin concentration in early childhood and
lower total and truncal fat mass, leptin, and HOMA-IR in mid-childhood
(Table 1).

/*Air pollution exposure and early childhood cardiometabolic risk*/

Children whose mothers lived closest (<50m vs. ≥200m) to a major roadway
at the time of delivery had 0.3kg/m^{2} (95%CI: 0.0, 0.7) higher BMI,
1.7cm (95%CI: 0.6, 2.8) larger waist circumference, 1.9mm (95%CI: 0.6,
3.2) larger sum of skinfold thickness, and 40.7% (95%CI: 5.2, 88.1)
higher leptin concentration in early childhood. Children whose mothers
lived intermediate distances from a major roadway at delivery
(100-<200m) also had higher BMI z-score and larger waist circumference
in early childhood. Residential roadway proximity in early childhood was
contemporaneously associated with increased leptin concentration but not
other cardiometabolic outcomes (Table 2).

For each IQR increment in neighborhood traffic density at the time of
delivery, early childhood leptin concentration was 5.4% (95%CI: 1.3,
9.7) higher. Traffic density was not associated with other early
childhood cardiometabolic parameters. Prenatal and contemporaneous BC
and PM_{2.5} exposure were not associated with cardiometabolic risk in
early childhood (Table 2).

/*Air pollution exposure and mid-childhood cardiometabolic risk*/

Children whose mothers lived closest (<50m vs. ≥200m) to a major roadway
at the time of delivery had 2.1kg (95%CI: 0.8, 3.5) greater total fat
mass, 0.9kg (95%CI: 0.4, 1.5) greater truncal fat mass, and 78.3%
(95%CI: 18.5, 168.3) higher leptin concentration in mid-childhood.
Children whose mothers lived intermediate distances from a major roadway
at delivery (100-<200m) had higher BMI z-score and higher total and
truncal fat mass in mid-childhood. Residential roadway proximity at the
time of the mid-childhood follow-up visit was not associated with
cardiometabolic outcomes (Table 3).

In contrast to our /a priori/ hypothesis, exposure to PM_{2.5} during
the year prior to the mid-childhood visit was associated with lower
rather than higher BMI z-score, total and truncal fat mass, and HOMA-IR
[e.g. truncal fat mass was 0.3kg (95%CI: -0.5, -0.0) lower for each IQR
increment PM_{2.5}]. Also, for each IQR increment in neighborhood
traffic density at the time of delivery, mid-childhood HOMA-IR was 5.7%
(95%CI: -10.1, -1.1) lower. Other air pollution exposure metrics were
not associated with mid-childhood outcomes (Table 3).

/*Secondary analyses*/

When we considered associations of BC and PM_{2.5} exposure during first
and second trimesters and one week prior to the health outcome
assessment, for each IQR increment in PM_{2.5} exposure during the first
trimester, adiponectin in early childhood was 5.8% lower (95%CI: -10.5,
-1.0). Contrary to our /a priori/ hypothesis, for each IQR increment in
BC exposure during the week prior, HOMA-IR was 17.1% lower (95%CI:
-27.6, -5.2) in mid-childhood, not higher. Other exposure-outcome
relationships were null (data not shown).

In analyses with (versus without) inverse probability weighting, roadway
proximity at delivery had stronger associations with early childhood
outcomes and similar associations with mid-childhood outcomes (Table
S4). In the penalized spline model, roadway proximity at delivery and
mid-childhood truncal fat mass showed a stronger association with closer
roadway proximity (Figure 2) with similar results for total fat mass
(data not shown).

*DISCUSSION*

In our analysis of a large prospective cohort, infants whose mothers
lived close to a major roadway at the time of delivery had greater
adiposity in early and mid-childhood. However, prenatal and early life
exposure to air pollutants and traffic density were not consistently
associated with adiposity or insulin resistance.

Our findings suggest that features of roadway proximity distinct from
air pollution (or from the pollutants we measured) may contribute to
later cardiometabolic risk. For example, sleep disruption from roadway
noise[[#_ENREF_24][^{24}]] and light,[[#_ENREF_25][^{25}]] as well as
reduced neighborhood walkability[[#_ENREF_26][^{26}]] are roadway
characteristics independently associated with adiposity and
dysmetabolism. Alternatively, ultrafine particles (UFPs), which were not
measured in our cohort, could have driven the association between
residential roadway proximity and cardiometabolic health. UFPs, which
have a diameter < 0.1µm and are primarily emitted from vehicle exhaust,
have been increasingly implicated in health effects, particularly in
urban areas. UFPs increase with vehicle speed and decrease with idling,
features common to traffic on major roadways, and they aggregate quickly
to form larger particles, so concentrations fall rapidly with distance
from roadway.[[#_ENREF_27][^{27}]] Our findings may be impacted by
unmeasured confounding by socioeconomic status (SES), although roadway
proximity was not as tightly correlated as air pollution with the SES
factors measured in our cohort (data not shown). The findings may also
reflect random chance, particularly given the small sample sizes in the
roadway categories. However, an inverse association between roadway
proximity and childhood adiposity in spline models suggests against this
possibility.

Our results are consistent with one prior study in which residential
roadway proximity (<50m) but not PM_{2.5} predicted incident type 2
diabetes mellitus in adult women.[[#_ENREF_28][^{28}]] Also, in the
Project Viva cohort, impaired neurocognition in childhood was similarly
associated with roadway proximity (<50m) at the time of delivery but not
at the time of cognitive testing,[[#_ENREF_29][^{29}]] raising the
possibility of an /in utero/ programming effect. Nevertheless, our
findings require replication in other populations of pregnant women and
children.

We did not observe consistent associations of BC, PM_{2.5}, or traffic
density exposures with childhood cardiometabolic parameters, although
there were a few sporadic associations that did not follow a clear
pattern. For example, neighborhood traffic density at the time of
delivery and contemporaneous roadway proximity were associated with
higher leptin in early childhood. Also, contrary to our /a priori/
hypothesis, PM_{2.5} exposure during the year prior was associated with
lower rather than higher BMI z-score, total and truncal fat mass, and
HOMA-IR. Although the PM_{2.5} model estimated 10 × 10 km exposures
which could limit local contrast and bias results toward the null, it is
unlikely to have led to negative associations. The negative associations
are somewhat consistent with one rodent study in which overweight but
not normal weight mice exposed to PM_{2.5} in early childhood had
non-significantly lower HOMA-IR and body weight,[[#_ENREF_5][^{5}]] and
this is in line with an above average BMI z-score of children in our
cohort. However, this finding has not been replicated in other animal or
human studies, and the biological basis is not clear.

The bulk of the existing rodent and human literature supports an
association between air pollutants and cardiometabolic health. In
rodents, air pollution exposure led to visceral adiposity and insulin
resistance with effects mediated through induction of oxidative stress
and systemic inflammation,[[#_ENREF_4][^{4}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_5][^{5}]] as
well as neuroinflammation with consequent brain remodeling and altered
satiety signals.[[#_ENREF_30][^{30}]] In cohort studies of prenatal
exposure, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (a combustion byproduct of
fossil fuel and biomass burning)[[#_ENREF_8][^{8}]] has been associated
with early childhood obesity, and Project Viva infants born to mothers
living in neighborhoods with higher traffic density had more rapid
weight gain and greater risk of weight-for-length >95^{th} percentile by
6 months of age.[[#_ENREF_14][^{14}]] In elementary[[#_ENREF_9][^{9}]]
and teenage[[#_ENREF_6][^{6}]] cohorts in Southern California,
residential traffic pollution (NOx) at enrollment was associated with
BMI over 4-8 years of follow-up, and elementary school children in China
were more likely to be obese if school/residential air pollution
(PM_{10}, SO_{2}, and O_{3}) was higher during the two years preceding
the weight measurement.[[#_ENREF_7][^{7}]] Additionally,
population-based studies in Iran[[#_ENREF_10][^{10}]]^{,}
[[#_ENREF_12][^{12}]] and Germany[[#_ENREF_11][^{11}]] have demonstrated
an association between air pollution exposure and insulin resistance in
childhood.

Limitations of Project Viva that may have prevented us from observing a
persistent association between early life air pollution exposure and
cardiometabolic outcomes include generally low air pollution exposures
in the Boston area and a cohort of primarily white children of
moderately high SES at relatively low risk for adverse cardiometabolic
health. Strengths of included use of a large, prospective cohort with
multiple potential confounding variables, several measures of air
pollution exposure with daily spatiotemporal resolution, and evaluation
of both anthropometric and serum markers of dysmetabolism at two time
points in childhood.

In conclusion, infants whose mothers lived close to a major roadway at
the time of delivery were at risk for adverse cardiometabolic parameters
in early and mid-childhood. However, we found no evidence of a
persistent effect of prenatal or early life BC or PM_{2.5} exposures on
childhood cardiometabolic profile in a population with relatively high
SES exposed to modest levels of air pollution.

*CONFLICTS OF INTEREST STATEMENT*

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

*AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS*

AFF conceived this analysis and drafted the manuscript. AFF, HL-G, WP,
and SLR-S performed the analysis. All authors critically reviewed the
manuscript.

*ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS*

We thank Maria Harris for helpful discussions about refining exposure
measures. We also appreciate the work of past and present Project Viva
staff and the ongoing participation of the Project Viva mothers and
children.

The authors have received support from the National Institutes of Health
(K24HD069408, R37HD034568, P30DK092924, P30ES000002, P01ES009825,
R01AI102960, K12DK094721, K23ES024803), the Environmental Protection
Agency (RD83479801), the Harvard School of Public Health, and the
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute. This publication's contents are
solely the responsibility of the grantee and do not necessarily
represent the official views of the US EPA or any other organization.
Further, US EPA does not endorse the purchase of any commercial products
or services mentioned in the publication.\\
*REFERENCES*

*1.* Singh AS, Mulder C, Twisk JW, van Mechelen W, Chinapaw MJ. Tracking
of childhood overweight into adulthood: a systematic review of the
literature. /Obes Rev./ Sep 2008;9(5):474-488.

*2.* Symonds ME, Sebert SP, Hyatt MA, Budge H. Nutritional programming
of the metabolic syndrome. /Nat Rev Endocrinol./ Nov 2009;5(11):604-610.

*3.* McConnell R, Gilliland FD, Goran M, Allayee H, Hricko A, Mittelman
S. Does near-roadway air pollution contribute to childhood obesity?
/Pediatr Obes./ Mar 27 2015.

*4.* Sun Q, Yue P, Deiuliis JA, et al. Ambient air pollution exaggerates
adipose inflammation and insulin resistance in a mouse model of
diet-induced obesity. /Circulation./ Feb 3 2009;119(4):538-546.

*5.* Xu X, Yavar Z, Verdin M, et al. Effect of early particulate air
pollution exposure on obesity in mice: role of p47phox. /Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol./ Dec 2010;30(12):2518-2527.

*6.* McConnell R, Shen E, Gilliland FD, et al. A longitudinal cohort
study of body mass index and childhood exposure to secondhand tobacco
smoke and air pollution: the Southern California Children's Health
Study. /Environ Health Perspect./ Apr 2015;123(4):360-366.

*7.* Dong G, Qian Z, Liu M, et al. Ambient Air Pollution and the
Prevalence of Obesity in Chinese Children: The Seven Northeastern Cities
Study. /Obesity (Silver Spring)./ 2014;22(3):795-800.

*8.* Rundle A, Hoepner L, Hassoun A, et al. Association of childhood
obesity with maternal exposure to ambient air polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons during pregnancy. /Am J Epidemiol./ Jun 1
2012;175(11):1163-1172.

*9.* Jerrett M, McConnell R, Wolch J, et al. Traffic-related air
pollution and obesity formation in children: a longitudinal, multilevel
analysis. /Environ Health./ 2014;13:49.

*10.* Kelishadi R, Mirghaffari N, Poursafa P, Gidding SS. Lifestyle and
environmental factors associated with inflammation, oxidative stress and
insulin resistance in children. /Atherosclerosis./ Mar
2009;203(1):311-319.

*11.* Thiering E, Cyrys J, Kratzsch J, et al. Long-term exposure to
traffic-related air pollution and insulin resistance in children:
results from the GINIplus and LISAplus birth cohorts. /Diabetologia./
Aug 2013;56(8):1696-1704.

*12.* Poursafa P, Mansourian M, Motlagh ME, Ardalan G, Kelishadi R. Is
air quality index associated with cardiometabolic risk factors in
adolescents? The CASPIAN-III Study. /Environ Res./ Oct 2014;134:105-109.

*13.* Janghorbani M, Momeni F, Mansourian M. Systematic review and
metaanalysis of air pollution exposure and risk of diabetes. /Eur J
Epidemiol./ Apr 2014;29(4):231-242.

*14.* Fleisch AF, Rifas-Shiman SL, Koutrakis P, et al. Prenatal exposure
to traffic pollution: associations with reduced fetal growth and rapid
infant weight gain. /Epidemiology./ Jan 2015;26(1):43-50.

*15.* Oken E, Baccarelli AA, Gold DR, et al. Cohort profile: project
viva. /Int J Epidemiol./ Feb 2015;44(1):37-48.

*16.* Gryparis A, Coull B, Schwartz J, Suh H. Semiparametric latent
variable regression models for spatio-teomporal modeling of mobile
source particles in the greater Boston area /Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics)/ 2007;56(2):183-209.

*17.* Kloog I, Melly SJ, Ridgway WL, Coull BA, Schwartz J. Using new
satellite based exposure methods to study the association between
pregnancy PM(2).(5) exposure, premature birth and birth weight in
Massachusetts. /Environ Health./ 2012;11:40.

*18.* Kloog I, Chudnovsky A, Just A, et al. A new hybrid spatio-temporal
model for estimating daily multi-year PM2.5 concentrations across
northeastern USA using high resolution aerosol optical depth data.
/Atmospheric Environment./ 2014;95:581-590.

*19.* Perng W, Gillman MW, Mantzoros CS, Oken E. A prospective study of
maternal prenatal weight and offspring cardiometabolic health in
midchildhood. /Ann Epidemiol./ Nov 2014;24(11):793-800 e791.

*20.* Fleisch AF, Gold DR, Rifas-Shiman SL, et al. Air pollution
exposure and abnormal glucose tolerance during pregnancy: the project
Viva cohort. /Environ Health Perspect./ Apr 2014;122(4):378-383.

*21.* Oken E, Kleinman KP, Rich-Edwards J, Gillman MW. A nearly
continuous measure of birth weight for gestational age using a United
States national reference. /BMC Pediatr./ Jul 8 2003;3:6.

*22.* Karner AA, Eisinger DS, Niemeier DA. Near-roadway air quality:
synthesizing the findings from real-world data. /Environ Sci Technol./
Jul 15 2010;44(14):5334-5344.

*23.* Environmental Protection Agency. Observational Data for Black
Carbon. Available at:
[[http://www.epa.gov/blackcarbon/2012report/Chapter5.pdf]]. Accessed 4
March 2015. 2012. Published Last Modified Date|. Accessed Dated
Accessed|.

*24.* Mavanji V, Teske JA, Billington CJ, Kotz CM. Partial sleep
deprivation by environmental noise increases food intake and body weight
in obesity-resistant rats. /Obesity (Silver Spring)./ Jul
2013;21(7):1396-1405.

*25.* Obayashi K, Saeki K, Iwamoto J, et al. Exposure to light at night,
nocturnal urinary melatonin excretion, and obesity/dyslipidemia in the
elderly: a cross-sectional analysis of the HEIJO-KYO study. /J Clin
Endocrinol Metab./ Jan 2013;98(1):337-344.

*26.* Saelens BE, Sallis JF, Black JB, Chen D. Neighborhood-based
differences in physical activity: an environment scale evaluation. /Am J
Public Health./ Sep 2003;93(9):1552-1558.

*27.* Sioutas C, Delfino RJ, Singh M. Exposure assessment for
atmospheric ultrafine particles (UFPs) and implications in epidemiologic
research. /Environ Health Perspect./ Aug 2005;113(8):947-955.

*28.* Puett RC, Hart JE, Schwartz J, Hu FB, Liese AD, Laden F. Are
particulate matter exposures associated with risk of type 2 diabetes?
/Environ Health Perspect./ Mar 2011;119(3):384-389.

*29.* Harris MH, Gold DR, Rifas-Shiman SL, et al. Prenatal and Childhood
Traffic-Related Pollution Exposure and Childhood Cognition in the
Project Viva Cohort (Massachusetts, USA). /Environ Health Perspect./ Oct
2015;123(10):1072-1078.

*30.* Bolton JL, Smith SH, Huff NC, et al. Prenatal air pollution
exposure induces neuroinflammation and predisposes offspring to weight
gain in adulthood in a sex-specific manner. /FASEB J./ Nov
2012;26(11):4743-4754.

| *Table 1.* Characteristics of study participants overall and by third trimester black carbon (BC) exposure                                           |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------+------------------+------------------+-------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                      |                    | *Quartiles of third trimester BC*   |
| *3^{rd} trimester BC (µg/m^{3}), Mean (SD)*                                                                                                          | *Total*            | *Q1 (lowest)*                       | *Q2*             | *Q3*             | *Q4 (highest)*    |
|                                                                                                                                                      |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
|                                                                                                                                                      | 0.69 (0.23)        | 0.40 (0.09)                         | 0.60 (0.05)      | 0.76 (0.05)      | 1.00 (0.14)       |
|                                                                                                                                                      | *Mean (SD) or %*   | *Mean (SD) or %*                    |
| *Maternal characteristics*                                                                                                                           |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| Age at enrollment (years)                                                                                                                            | 32.1 (5.2)         | 33.0 (4.3)                          | 32.7 (5.1)       | 31.5 (5.6)       | 31.2 (5.8)        |
| Prepregnancy BMI (kg/m^{2})                                                                                                                          | 24.8 (5.3)         | 24.6 (5.2)                          | 24.8 (5.6)       | 24.6 (5.0)       | 25.3 (5.6)        |
| College graduate (%)                                                                                                                                 | 68                 | 78                                  | 71               | 66               | 58                |
| Smoking habits (%)                                                                                                                                   |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 69                 | 67                                  | 68               | 70               | 71                |
|   Never                                                                                                                                              |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 20                 | 24                                  | 21               | 18               | 18                |
|   Former                                                                                                                                             |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 11                 | 10                                  | 11               | 12               | 11                |
|   During pregnancy                                                                                                                                   |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| Glucose tolerance (%)                                                                                                                                |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 83                 | 82                                  | 82               | 85               | 85                |
|   Normal                                                                                                                                             |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 9                  | 11                                  | 10               | 6                | 7                 |
|   Failed GCT, normal OGTT                                                                                                                            |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 3                  | 3                                   | 3                | 3                | 4                 |
|   IGT                                                                                                                                                |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 5                  | 5                                   | 5                | 6                | 4                 |
|   GDM                                                                                                                                                |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| *Neighborhood characteristics*                                                                                                                       |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| Median household income in census tract ($)^{a}                                                                                                      | 57,763 (21,656)    | 70,993 (20,006)                     | 60,396(20,411)   | 53,505(20,740)   | 45,508 (17,035)   |
| *Child characteristics in infancy*                                                                                                                   |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| Gestational age (weeks)                                                                                                                              | 39.5 (1.8)         | 39.5 (1.7)                          | 39.4 (1.8)       | 39.6 (1.6)       | 39.5 (1.8)        |
| Birth weight-for-gestational age z-score                                                                                                             | 0.20 (0.97)        | 0.32 (1.02)                         | 0.20 (0.93)      | 0.19 (0.96)      | 0.06 (0.94)       |
| Sex (%)                                                                                                                                              | 49                 | 47                                  | 50               | 49               | 49                |
| Race/ethnicity (%)^{b}                                                                                                                               |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 64                 | 84                                  | 67               | 56               | 47                |
|   White                                                                                                                                              |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 17                 | 5                                   | 14               | 24               | 25                |
|   Black                                                                                                                                              |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 6                  | 1                                   | 6                | 5                | 11                |
|   Hispanic                                                                                                                                           |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 5                  | 3                                   | 5                | 6                | 4                 |
|   Asian                                                                                                                                              |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+BEGIN_QUOTE                                                                                                                                        | 9                  | 7                                   | 8                | 9                | 13                |
|   Other                                                                                                                                              |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| #+END_QUOTE                                                                                                                                          |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| *Early childhood characteristics*                                                                                                                    |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| Age at early childhood visit                                                                                                                         | 3.3 (0.4)          | 3.3 (0.3)                           | 3.3 (0.3)        | 3.3 (0.4)        | 3.3 (0.5)         |
| BMI z-score                                                                                                                                          | 0.5 (1.0)          | 0.4 (1.0)                           | 0.5 (1.0)        | 0.4 (1.1)        | 0.5 (1.0)         |
| Waist circumference (cm)                                                                                                                             | 51.4 (3.7)         | 51.4 (3.5)                          | 51.4 (3.5)       | 51.2 (3.8)       | 51.4 (4.0)        |
| Sum of skinfolds (mm)                                                                                                                                | 16.7 (4.3)         | 16.7 (4.2)                          | 17.1 (4.2)       | 16.6 (4.7)       | 16.5 (4.2)        |
| Leptin (ng/mL)                                                                                                                                       | 2.0 (2.0)          | 1.9 (2.1)                           | 1.8 (1.7)        | 2.1 (2.3)        | 2.0 (1.8)         |
| Adiponectin (µg/mL)                                                                                                                                  | 22.3 (5.6)         | 22.8 (5.2)                          | 22.1 (5.6)       | 22.4 (5.4)       | 22.0 (5.9)        |
| *Mid-childhood characteristics*                                                                                                                      |                    |                                     |                  |                  |                   |
| Age at mid-childhood visit                                                                                                                           | 8.0 (0.9)          | 7.8 (0.7)                           | 7.9 (0.9)        | 8.0 (0.8)        | 8.1 (1.0)         |
| BMI z-score                                                                                                                                          | 0.4 (1.0)          | 0.4 (1.0)                           | 0.4 (1.0)        | 0.3 (1.1)        | 0.5 (1.0)         |
| Total fat mass (kg)                                                                                                                                  | 7.5 (3.9)          | 7.0 (3.2)                           | 7.4 (3.9)        | 7.4 (4.1)        | 8.0 (4.2)         |
| Truncal fat mass (kg)                                                                                                                                | 2.5 (1.7)          | 2.3 (1.4)                           | 2.5 (1.8)        | 2.5 (1.7)        | 2.7 (1.8)         |
| Leptin (ng/mL)                                                                                                                                       | 6.1 (7.5)          | 5.6 (6.6)                           | 5.4 (6.5)        | 5.8 (7.5)        | 7.6 (8.7)         |
| Adiponectin (µg/mL)                                                                                                                                  | 15.6 (8.8)         | 15.8 (8.9)                          | 14.4 (8.8)       | 16.2 (8.5)       | 15.5 (8.9)        |
| HOMA-IR                                                                                                                                              | 1.9 (1.8)          | 1.6 (1.4)                           | 1.8 (1.4)        | 1.8 (1.6)        | 2.3 (2.5)         |
| Abbreviations: GCT: Glucose tolerance test; OGTT: Oral glucose tolerance test; IGT: Impaired glucose tolerance; GDM: Gestational diabetes mellitus   |
|                                                                                                                                                      |
| ^{a}Based on address at the time of delivery                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                                                      |
| ^{b}Maternal race/ethnicity is substituted in 10% of children whose race/ethnicity is missing                                                        |

*Table 2.* Covariate-adjusted^{a} associations of traffic-related air
pollution in pregnancy and in early childhood with adiposity and
cardiometabolic health in *early childhood* (median: 3.3 years of age).
For black carbon, fine particulate matter, and traffic density
exposures, estimates are mean difference (95% confidence intervals) in
outcome for each interquartile range increment in exposure.^{b} For
roadway proximity, estimates are mean difference (95% confidence
intervals) for each proximate category of roadway proximity versus ≥200
m. Estimates with 95% confidence intervals that do not cross the null
are bolded.

|                                                         | *BMI z-score *     | *Waist circumference *   | *Sum of skinfold thickness *   | *Leptin *            | *Adiponectin\\          |
|                                                         |                    |                          |                                |                      | (% change)*             |
|                                                         | *(z-units)*        | *(cm)*                   | *(mm)*                         | *(% change)*         |                         |
|---------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------------+----------------------+-------------------------|
| *Black carbon (BC) exposure (µg/m^{3})*                 |                    |                          |                                |                      |                         |
| Third trimester                                         | -0.0 (-0.1, 0.1)   | 0.0 (-0.3, 0.4)          | -0.0 (-0.4, 0.4)               | 7.4 (-1.7, 17.3)     | -2.1 (-6.2, 2.3)        |
| Year prior to early childhood visit                     | -0.0 (-0.1, 0.1)   | -0.1 (-0.4, 0.3)         | -0.1 (-0.4, 0.3)               | 3.0 (-4.9, 11.6)     | -0.6 (-4.5, 3.4)        |
| *Fine particulate (PM_{2.5}) exposure (µg/m^{3})*       |                    |                          |                                |                      |                         |
| Third trimester                                         | 0.0 (-0.1, 0.1)    | 0.2 (-0.1, 0.5)          | 0.3 (-0.1, 0.6)                | -5.4 (-12.4, 2.1)    | -3.1 (-6.7, 0.6)        |
| Year prior to early childhood visit                     | -0.0 (-0.1, 0.1)   | -0.2 (-0.6, 0.2)         | 0.3 (-0.2, 0.8)                | 8.8 (-1.4, 20.0)     | -0.9 (-5.6, 4.0)        |
| *Near-residence traffic density*                        |                    |                          |                                |                      |                         |
| Birth address                                           | 0.0 (-0.0, 0.1)    | 0.0 (-0.1, 0.2)          | 0.0 (-0.2, 0.2)                | *5.4 (1.3, 9.7)*     | 0.0 (-1.9, 2.0)         |
| Early childhood address                                 | 0.0 (-0.0, 0.1)    | -0.0 (-0.2, 0.1)         | 0.0 (-0.2, 0.2)                | 2.0 (-1.5, 5.6)      | 0.8 (-0.9, 2.5)         |
| *Proximity to major roadway, birth address *            |                    |                          |                                |                      |                         |
| <50 m                                                   | *0.3 (0.0, 0.7)*   | *1.7 (0.6, 2.8)*         | *1.9 (0.6, 3.2)*               | *40.7 (5.2, 88.1)*   | 1.1 (-12.3, 16.5)       |
| 50‒<100 m                                               | -0.0 (-0.4,0.3)    | 0.0 (-1.2, 1.3)          | 0.1 (-1.3, 1.5)                | 21.0 (-8.6, 60.2)    | -2.0 (-14.6, 12.4)      |
| 100-<200 m                                              | *0.4 (0.1, 0.6)*   | *1.0 (0.1, 1.8)*         | 0.7 (-0.3, 1.7)                | 17.4 (-7.7, 49.2)    | *-13.1 (-22.7, -2.3)*   |
| ≥200 m                                                  | Reference          | Reference                | Reference                      | Reference            | Reference               |
| *Proximity to major roadway, early childhood address*   |                    |                          |                                |                      |                         |
| <50 m                                                   | 0.1 (-0.2, 0.5)    | 0.8 (-0.5, 2.1)          | 1.1 (-0.4, 2.7)                | *41.7 (3.0, 94.9)*   | 9.5 (-6.3, 28.0)        |
| 50‒<100 m                                               | -0.0 (-0.4, 0.3)   | -0.1 (-1.4, 1.2)         | -0.8 (-2.3, 0.6)               | -8.0 (-33.2, 26.6)   | -9.5 (-22.5, 5.8)       |
| 100-<200 m                                              | 0.1 (-0.2, 0.3)    | -0.1 (-1.0, 0.7)         | 0.1 (-0.9, 1.1)                | 0.4 (-19.0, 24.5)    | 2.0 (-8.2, 13.3)        |
| ≥200 m                                                  | Reference          | Reference                | Reference                      | Reference            | Reference               |

^{a}Model adjusted for characteristics of child (age, sex,
race/ethnicity), mother (age, education, smoking during pregnancy), and
neighborhood (census tract median income), as well as season and date of
health outcome.

^{b}Interquartile range= 0.33 µg/m^{3} for third trimester BC, 0.22
µg/m^{3} for BC during the year prior to the early childhood visit, 2.20
µg/m^{3} for third trimester PM_{2.5}, 1.33 µg/m^{3} for PM_{2.5} during
the year prior to the early childhood visit, 1,454 km*vehicles/day for
traffic density at birth, and 1,247 km*vehicles/day for traffic density
at early childhood address.

*Table 3.* Covariate-adjusted^{a} associations of traffic-related air
pollution in pregnancy and in mid-childhood with adiposity and
cardiometabolic health in *mid-childhood* (median: 7.7 years of age).
For black carbon, fine particulate matter, and traffic density
exposures, estimates are mean difference (95% confidence intervals) in
outcome for each interquartile range increment in exposure.^{b} For
roadway proximity, estimates are mean difference (95% confidence
intervals) for each proximate category of roadway proximity versus ≥200
m. Estimates with 95% confidence intervals that do not cross the null
are bolded.

|                                                       | *BMI z-score *        | *Total fat mass *     | *Truncal fat mass*    | *Leptin *              | *Adiponectin *        | *HOMA-IR*               |
|                                                       |                       |                       |                       |                        |                       |                         |
|                                                       | *(z-units)*           | *(kg)*                | *(kg)*                | *(% change)*           | *(% change) *         | *(% change)*            |
|-------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------|
| *Black carbon (BC) exposure (µg/m^{3})*               |                       |                       |                       |                        |                       |                         |
| Third trimester                                       | -0.0 (-0.1, 0.1)      | -0.2 (-0.5, 0.2)      | -0.1 (-0.2, 0.1)      | 4.0 (-6.6, 15.7)       | 2.4 (-4.9, 10.3)      | 1.1 (-8.8, 12.1)        |
| Year prior to mid-childhood visit                     | -0.1 (-0.2, 0.0)      | 0.0 (-0.3, 0.4)       | 0.0 (-0.1, 0.2)       | 3.5 (-6.8, 15.0)       | 1.3 (-5.9, 9.0)       | 3.9 (-5.9, 14.6)        |
| *Fine particulate (PM_{2.5}) exposure (µg/m^{3})*     |                       |                       |                       |                        |                       |                         |
| Third trimester                                       | -0.0 (-0.1, 0.0)      | -0.2 (-0.6, 0.1)      | -0.1 (-0.2, 0.1)      | -5.1 (-14.7, 5.6)      | -5.0 (-11.7, 2.3)     | 2.8 (-6.6, 13.0)        |
| Year prior to mid-childhood visit                     | *-0.2 (-0.4, -0.1)*   | *-0.6 (-1.2, -0.1)*   | *-0.3 (-0.5, -0.0)*   | -12.1 (-24.9, 2.8)     | -2.8 (-13.0, 8.6)     | *-17.8 (-29.2, -4.7)*   |
| *Near-residence traffic density*                      |                       |                       |                       |                        |                       |                         |
| Birth address                                         | 0.0 (-0.0, 0.1)       | 0.0 (-0.2, 0.2)       | -0.0 (-0.1, 0.1)      | 4.0 (-1.3, 9.6)        | 0.6 (-3.0, 4.3)       | *-5.7 (-10.1, -1.1)*    |
| Mid-childhood address                                 | -0.0 (-0.1, 0.0)      | 0.0 (-0.1, 0.2)       | 0.0 (-0.1, 0.1)       | 1.9 (-2.6, 6.6)        | -0.9 (-4.1, 2.3)      | 0.1 (-4.2, 4.5)         |
| *Proximity to major roadway, birth address*           |                       |                       |                       |                        |                       |                         |
| <50 m                                                 | 0.1 (-0.2, 0.5)       | *2.1 (0.8, 3.5)*      | *0.9 (0.4, 1.5)*      | *78.3 (18.5, 168.3)*   | -13.2 (-34.7, 15.4)   | -0.2 (-33.6, 49.8)      |
| 50‒<100 m                                             | -0.0 (-0.4, 0.4)      | -0.5 (-2.0, 1.0)      | -0.3 (-0.9, 0.4)      | -4.9 (-36.0, 41.3)     | -1.2 (-25.0, 30.2)    | *-32.4 (-53.6, -1.4)*   |
| 100-<200 m                                            | *0.3 (0.0, 0.5)*      | *1.1 (0.1, 2.0)*      | *0.4 (-0.0, 0.8)*     | 1.2 (-21.5, 30.5)      | 1.0 (-15.4, 20.5)     | -6.3 (-27.2, 20.7)      |
| ≥200 m                                                | Reference             | Reference             | Reference             | Reference              | Reference             | Reference               |
| *Proximity to major roadway, mid-childhood address*   |                       |                       |                       |                        |                       |                         |
| <50 m                                                 | -0.0 (-0.4, 0.4)      | 0.1 (-1.4, 1.6)       | 0.0 (-0.6, 0.7)       | 46.6 (-5.3, 127.1)     | -13.5 (-36.1, 17.2)   | -1.8 (-36.6, 52.3)      |
| 50‒<100 m                                             | -0.1 (-0.5, 0.3)      | -1.0 (-2.5, 0.5)      | -0.4 (-1.1, 0.2)      | -19.1 (-45.5, 20.0)    | 0.4 (-23.6, 32.0)     | -13.1 (-41.3, 28.6)     |
| 100-<200 m                                            | 0.1 (-0.2, 0.3)       | 0.4 (-0.6, 1.5)       | 0.2 (-0.3, 0.6)       | 8.6 (-18.0, 43.9)      | 5.6 (-13.1, 28.3)     | -5.8 (-29.4, 25.8)      |
| ≥200 m                                                | Reference             | Reference             | Reference             | Reference              | Reference             | Reference               |

^{a} Model adjusted for characteristics of child (age, sex,
race/ethnicity), mother (age, education, smoking during pregnancy),
neighborhood (census tract median income), as well as season and date of
health outcome.

^{b}Interquartile range= 0.33 µg/m^{3} for third trimester BC, 0.20
µg/m^{3} for BC during the year prior to the mid-childhood visit, 2.20
µg/m^{3} for third trimester PM_{2.5}, 1.66 µg/m^{3} for PM_{2.5} during
the year prior to the mid-childhood visit, 1,454 km*vehicles/day for
traffic density at birth, and 1,186 km*vehicles/day for mid-childhood
traffic density.
