*Prenatal Exposure to Traffic Pollution: Associations with Reduced Fetal
Growth and Rapid Infant Weight Gain*

Abby F. Fleisch^{1}, Sheryl L. Rifas-Shiman^{2}, Petros Koutrakis^{3},
Joel Schwartz^{3}, Itai Kloog^{3,4}, Steven Melly^{3}, Brent Coull^{5},
Antonella Zanobetti^{3}, Matthew W. Gillman^{2,6}, Diane R. Gold^{3,7},
Emily Oken^{2}

*Affliliations*

^{1}Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA

^{2}Obesity Prevention Program, Department of Population Medicine,
Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute,
Boston, MA, USA

^{3}Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA

^{4}Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel

^{5}Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA

^{6}Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA

^{7}Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

*Corresponding author:*

Abby F. Fleisch, MD, MPH

Department of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital

300 Longwood Ave

Boston, MA 02115

[[mailto:abby.fleisch@childrens.harvard.edu][abby.fleisch@childrens.harvard.edu]]

Phone: 617-355-7476, FAX: 617-730-0194

*Running title:* Traffic pollution and early growth

*Key words:* Air pollution, birth weight, BC, fetal growth, infant
weight gain, obesity

*Competing financial interests declaration:*

The authors have no competing interests.

*Funding *

The authors have received support from the National Institutes of Health
(K24 HD069408, R01HD 034568, P30 DK092924, P03ES000002, P01 ES009825,
K12 DK094721-02); the Environmental Protection Agency (RD83479801), the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (T32 HS000063), the Harvard
School of Public Health, and the Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute.

*Manuscript word count:* 3,309

*\\
ABSTRACT (250 word limit)*

*Background:* Prenatal air pollution exposure inhibits fetal growth, but
implications for postnatal growth are unknown.\\
*Methods:* We assessed weights and lengths of Project Viva infants at
birth and 6 months. We estimated trimester-specific residential black
carbon (BC) and particulate matter (PM_{2.5}) using spatiotemporal
models. We measured traffic density and roadway proximity at late
pregnancy address using geographic information systems. We performed
linear and logistic regression adjusted for sociodemographics.

*Results:* Mean (SD, n) birth weight-for-gestational age z-score (fetal
growth) was 0.17 (0.97, n=2,114), 0-6 month weight-for-age gain 0.27
z-units (1.11, n=1,172), and 0-6 month weight-for-length (WFL) gain 0.23
z-units (1.11, n=689); 17% were obese (WFL />/ 95^{th} %ile) at 6
months. In adjusted analyses, we observed lower fetal growth among
infants in the highest (vs. lowest) quartile of (1) residential BC
exposure during each trimester [e.g. third trimester BC (-0.16 units;
95% CI: -0.28, -0.05)] and (2) traffic density in late pregnancy (-0.14
units; 95% CI: -0.25, -0.03). Infants in the highest (vs. lowest)
quartile of traffic density had more rapid 0-6 month weight-for-age gain
(0.14 units; 95% CI: -0.01, 0.29) and higher odds of obesity (vs. WFL
<85^{th}%ile) at 6 months (1.79; 95% CI: 1.10, 2.89) after adjustment
for fetal growth and gestational age at birth. Infant obesity was also
associated with third trimester BC exposure (Q4 vs. Q1 OR 1.60; 95% CI:
0.98, 2.61). Associations were attenuated for PM_{2.5} exposures.

*Conclusions:* Infants exposed prenatally to higher traffic-related
pollution may exhibit postnatal obesity in addition to reduced fetal
growth.

*\\
*

*INTRODUCTION*

Traffic-related air pollution has been associated with reduced fetal
growth in multiple prior studies, including
meta-analyses.[[#_ENREF_1][^{1}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_2][^{2}]][[#_ENREF_3][]]
The smallest airborne particles, with an aerodynamic diameter of less
than 2.5 Î¼m (PM_{2.5}), readily enter alveoli and are most closely
linked to health effects.[[#_ENREF_3][^{3}]] Mechanistically, air
pollution, which has been associated with elevated systemic inflammatory
markers in non-pregnant[[#_ENREF_4][^{4}]] and
pregnant[[#_ENREF_5][^{5}]] adults, may induce placental inflammation,
and thereby inhibit nutrient transfer from mother to fetus.

In addition to clinical relevance in the immediate neonatal
period,[[#_ENREF_6][^{6}]] reduced fetal growth may act synergistically
with greater weight gain during infancy to promote cardiovascular
disease risk later in life.[[#_ENREF_7][^{7}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_8][^{8}]]
However, whether infants exposed to prenatal air pollution are at
increased risk for rapid postnatal weight gain in addition to reduced
fetal growth has not been evaluated. Prenatal exposure to tobacco
smoke,[[#_ENREF_9][^{9}]] another source of particulate matter, and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons[[#_ENREF_10][^{10}]] (a combustion
byproduct of fossil fuel and biomass burning) have been associated with
increased odds of obesity in early childhood in population-based
studies. In rodent models, adult mice developed visceral adipocyte
hypertrophy and increased central adiposity following long-term exposure
to fine particulate matter.[[#_ENREF_11][^{11}]]

In the present analysis of a large cohort of women and their offspring
residing in the greater Boston area, our primary objective was to
evaluate the extent to which trimester-specific prenatal exposures to
PM_{2.5} and black carbon (BC) (a traffic-related component of PM_{2.5})
were associated with fetal growth at birth and to evaluate the extent to
which trimester-specific prenatal and 0-6 month postnatal exposures to
PM_{2.5} and BC were associated with weight gain from 0- 6 months of age
and obesity at 6 months of age. Secondary objectives were to estimate
associations with additional measures of exposure to traffic-related air
pollution, including neighborhood traffic density and home roadway
proximity. We hypothesized that prenatal air pollution exposure may be
associated with both reduced fetal growth and increased postnatal weight
gain.

*METHODS*

*Study population and design*

Study subjects were participants in Project Viva, a prospective
observational cohort study of prenatal exposures, pregnancy outcomes,
and offspring health. Details of recruitment procedures and study
protocol have been previously published.[[#_ENREF_12][^{12}]] Of 2,128
Project Viva participants with a live singleton offspring, 2,115 had
data available for at least one exposure and one outcome studied. We
included a subset in each analysis based primarily on the number with
outcome data available. Mothers of infants with (vs. without) a 6 month
follow-up visit (n=1,175) were more likely to have a lower pre-pregnancy
BMI and lower first trimester BC exposure and to be white, older,
educated, higher income, and non-smokers. Infants of these mothers had
higher birth weight-for-gestational age z-score and longer gestation
(Supplemental table, S1). Of infants who attended a 6 month follow-up
visit, weight and length were measured in 1,172; 689 also had a measure
of length at birth. Research measures of newborn length were missing
primarily in infants who were born prematurely or overnight or on
weekends. Infants with (vs. without) a newborn length had a lower birth
weight-for-gestational age z-score and gestational age (data not shown).

Participants provided their residential address at enrollment and
updated it at study visits that occurred at the end of the second
trimester, soon after birth, and at 6 months postpartum. We included
mother/infant pairs who lived at an address in our catchment area for at
least 75% of each exposure time period in analyses of air pollution
exposures.

Mothers provided written informed consent at enrollment and for their
infants after birth, and Institutional Review Boards of the
participating sites approved the study.

*Air pollution exposures*

We estimated daily black carbon (BC) exposure at each residential
address using a validated spatiotemporal land-use regression
model.[[#_ENREF_13][^{13}]] We modeled daily PM_{2.5} exposure at each
residence using aerosol optical depth (AOD) data.[[#_ENREF_14][^{14}]]
These models accounted for moves during pregnancy and postnatally. To
obtain exposures during specific time windows, we averaged daily
exposure estimates as follows: from the date of the last menstrual
period (LMP) to the 93^{rd} day after LMP for first trimester, from the
94^{th} day after LMP to the 187^{th} day after LMP for second
trimester, from the 188^{th} day after LMP to the day before birth for
third trimester, and from the date of birth to the 182^{nd} day after
birth for 0-6 month postnatal exposures.

While BC and PM_{2.5} exposure estimates were modeled on a daily basis,
neighborhood traffic density [average daily traffic (vehicles/day) x
length of road (km) within 100 m] and home roadway proximity (distance
to Census Feature Class Code A1 or A2 roads) were based on annual
estimates at a given residential address. We used the 2002 road
inventory from Massachusetts Executive Office of Transportation to
estimate traffic density and 2005 ESRI Street Map^{TM} North America
ArcGIS 10 Data and Maps to estimate roadway proximity at the residential
address participants provided at the time of delivery; thus, these
estimates most directly reflected late pregnancy exposures. However, as
only 10% of women moved during pregnancy and 5% from 0-6 months
postpartum, we were unable to differentiate residential traffic density
and roadway proximity during early pregnancy vs. late pregnancy vs.
postnatally.

*Assessment of fetal and postnatal growth*

We obtained infant birth weight in grams from the hospital medical
record. We calculated length of gestation in days by subtracting the
date of the LMP from the date of delivery. If gestational age according
to the second trimester ultrasound differed from that according to the
LMP by more than 10 days, we used the ultrasound result to determine
gestational length. We determined birth weight-for-gestational age and
sex z-score from a US national reference.[[#_ENREF_15][^{15}]] We chose
birth weight-for-gestational age z-score as opposed to clinical
categories (small- vs. appropriate- vs. large-for-gestational age) to
maximize power. Also, it did not require assumption of a linear
relationship between gestational age and birth weight, which would be
necessary if gestational age was added as a covariate into a model
predicting birth weight.[[#_ENREF_15][^{15}]]

Trained research assistants weighed infants at 6 months with a digital
scale (Seca Model 881; Seca Corporation, Hamburg, Germany) and measured
length at birth and 6 months with a Shorr measuring board (Shorr
Productions, Olney, Maryland). We calculated age- and sex-specific
weight-for-length z-score (WFL-z) and age- and sex-specific
weight-for-age z-score (WFA-z) from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) 2000 growth chart data.[[#_ENREF_16][^{16}]] WFL-z was
more likely to represent adiposity,[[#_ENREF_17][^{17}]] but sample
sizes were larger for WFA-z . For the obesity outcome, we calculated
age- and sex-specific WFL percentile.[[#_ENREF_16][^{16}]] We defined
obesity as â¥95^{th} percentile and normal weight as < 85^{th}
percentile.

*Assessment of covariates*

Using a combination of interviews and questionnaires, we collected
information on mothers' age at study enrollment (9.9 weeks gestation),
race/ethnicity, education, household income, smoking habits, date of
LMP, and infants' birthdate. We calculated mothers' pre-pregnancy BMI
from self-reported height and weight. We calculated total gestational
weight gain as the difference between self-reported pre-pregnancy weight
and the last weight recorded before delivery. At the end of the second
trimester (median 28.1 weeks), women underwent a two-tiered (50 g
non-fasting followed by 100 g fasting if abnormal) glucose screening
test, which we grouped into 4 categories of glucose tolerance, as
previously described.[[#_ENREF_18][^{18}]]

*Statistical analyses*

We used linear regression to evaluate associations of air pollution
exposures with birth weight-for-gestational age z-score and with change
in WFL-z and WFA-z from 0- 6 months. We used logistic regression to
evaluate the associations of air pollution exposures with obesity (WFL â¥
95^{th} percentile) versus normal weight (WFL <85^{th} percentile) at 6
months.

We considered each of the exposures (trimester-specific prenatal BC and
PM_{2.5}, 0-6 month postnatal BC and PM_{2.5}, and traffic density in
late pregnancy) in quartiles. We /a priori/ categorized proximity to
major roadway as />/ 200 m, 100 to < 200 m, 50 to /</ 100 m, and <50 m
for consistency with previous studies using â¥ 200m as a reference
group.[[#_ENREF_18][^{18}]] We first fit unadjusted models. Next we
created a full multivariate model for each of the exposures and outcomes
which included as covariates characteristics know to be associated with
infant size and growth, namely household income (> $70,000 or /</
$70,000), paternal BMI (continuous), maternal pre-pregnancy BMI
(continuous), race/ethnicity (white, black, Asian, Hispanic, other),
education (with or without college degree), pregnancy weight gain
(continuous), smoking habits (smoked during pregnancy, formerly smoked,
never smoked), and abnormal glucose tolerance (four
categories[[#_ENREF_18][^{18}]]). We considered but did not include
variables for maternal age, maternal height, infant sex, breastfeeding
duration, season, and long-term time trend, as these were not
confounders of the exposure-outcome relationships (i.e. the estimate for
the primary exposure changed by <10%) or did not significantly change
the results. Finally, we also conducted an analysis to examine the
extent to which air pollution exposures were associated with the
phenotype of low fetal growth and rapid infant weight gain in the same
individual. To do this, we created a multi-level outcome of normal fetal
growth/normal 0-6 month WFL-z (reference) vs. low fetal growth/normal
0-6 month WFL-z vs. normal fetal growth/rapid 0-6 month WFL-z vs. low
fetal growth/rapid 0-6 month WFL-z (outcome of interest). We defined low
vs. normal fetal growth as Q1 vs. Q2-4 and normal vs. rapid 0-6 month
WFL-z as Q4 vs. Q1-3.

As is common in large epidemiologic analyses, many participants were
missing data on one or more covariates. We used chained equations to
multiply impute missing values, generated 50 imputed datasets, and
combined multivariable modeling results (Proc MI ANALYZE) in SAS version
9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary NC).[[#_ENREF_19][^{19}]]

*RESULTS*

Mean (SD) maternal age was 31.8 (5.2) years, pre-pregnancy BMI was 24.9
(5.6) kg/m^{2}, and total gestational weight gain was 15.5 (5.7) kg. 67%
of women were white, and 65% were college graduates. Mean (SD) infant
birth weight-for-gestational age z-score was 0.17 (0.97) units, change
in WFL-z from 0- 6 months of age was 0.23 (1.11) units, change in WFA-z
from 0- 6 months of age was 0.27 (1.11) units, and 17% were obese at 6
months of age (Table 2).

Third trimester mean (SD, range) BC concentration was 0.7 Âµg/m^{3} (0.2,
0.1-1.6) which was typical for urban US (range 0.2-1.9 Âµg/m^{3} from
2005-2007). Third trimester mean (SD, range) PM_{2.5} concentration was
11.7 Âµg/m^{3} (1.6, 7.5-16.8). For context, the Environmental Protection
Agency standard for annual PM_{2.5} exposure was 15 Âµg/m^{3} at the time
and was lowered to 12 Âµg/m^{3} in December, 2012. Mean (SD, range)
neighborhood traffic density in late pregnancy was 1,492 (2,093,
0-30,860) vehicles/day x km of road within 100 m of residential address
(Table 1). 1,853 (87.7%) of subjects lived />/ 200 m from a major
roadway, and 73 (3.5%) lived < 50 m from a major roadway in late
pregnancy. Mothers who lived at addresses with lower BC exposure were
somewhat older, more highly educated, had higher household income, and
were more likely to be white and nonsmokers (Table 2).

Among infants exposed to the highest (vs. lowest) quartile of BC during
the third trimester, we observed lower fetal growth in unadjusted (birth
weight-for-gestational age z-score of -0.31; 95% CI: -0.43, -0.19) and
covariate-adjusted (-0.16; 95% CI: -0.28, -0.05) models. We observed
similar associations in covariate-adjusted models of fetal growth when
we considered infants with mothers exposed to the highest (vs. lowest)
quartile of BC in the first and second trimesters and exposed to the
highest (vs. lowest) quartile of neighborhood traffic density in late
pregnancy. Infants with mothers who lived < 50 m (vs. â¥ 200 m) from a
major roadway in late pregnancy also had lower fetal growth (-0.30
units; 95% CI: -0.51, -0.08) in covariate-adjusted models (Table 3).

Infants in the highest (vs. lowest) quartile of traffic density in late
pregnancy had increased WFA gain from 0-6 months of age in models that
were unadjusted (WFA-z change 0.30; 95% CI: 0.12, 0.48) and
covariate-adjusted (0.22; 95% CI: 0.04, 0.40). Estimates were attenuated
slightly when models were additionally adjusted for fetal growth and
gestational age (0.14; 95% CI: -0.01, 0.29), which are potentially on
the pathway between prenatal air pollution exposure and infant weight
gain. Fully-adjusted estimates were similar but CIs were wider and
included the null for the WFL-z outcome (0.17; 95% CI: -0.06, 0.41),
likely because of the substantially smaller sample size given the
limited number of infants with birth length assessed. Roadway proximity
and BC exposure generally appeared associated with increased WFA-z and
WFL-z from 0-6 months of age, although all confidence intervals included
the null. For BC, third trimester exposures were most strongly
associated with infant weight gain. For example, when considering the
extent to which the highest (vs. lowest) quartile of exposure was
associated with the WFL-z outcome, third trimester BC exposure was
associated with a 0.15 unit (95% CI: -0.10, 0.39) increase vs. -0.01
(95% CI: -0.26, 0.23) for first trimester and 0.06 (95% CI: -0.18, 0.30)
for 0-6 month postnatal exposure (Table 3).

Infants in the highest (vs. lowest) quartile of traffic density in late
pregnancy also had increased odds of obesity at 6 months in unadjusted
(1.63; 95% CI: 1.03, 2.57), covariate-adjusted (1.70; 95% CI: 1.05,
2.73), and fetal growth and gestational age-adjusted (1.79; 95% CI:
1.10, 2.89) models. In fully-adjusted models, odds of obesity at 6
months of age was 1.60 (95% CI: 0.98, 2.61) times higher for infants in
the highest (vs. lowest) quartile of third trimester BC exposure and
1.50 (95% CI: 0.94, 2.40) times higher for infants in the highest (vs.
lowest) quartile of 0-6 month postnatal BC exposure. Odds of obesity
were similar for associations with distance to roadway and were
decreased for associations with first and second trimester BC exposure,
all with confidence intervals that included the null (Table 3).

An infant's odds of having both low fetal growth and rapid 0-6 month WFL
gain as compared to having normal fetal growth and normal 0-6 month WFL
gain was increased for infants in the highest vs. lowest quartile of
traffic density (OR 2.62; 95% CI: 1.00, 6.86) and third trimester BC
exposure (OR 2.06; 95% CI: 0.85, 4.98) in covariate-adjusted models.

When we considered exposure to trimester-specific and postnatal
PM_{2.5}, PM_{2.5} also appeared associated with lower fetal growth and
higher postnatal weight gain and obesity, but the strength of the
associations was attenuated and all confidence intervals included the
null (Supplemental Table, S2).

*DISCUSSION*

Our analysis of data from a large, prospective cohort confirmed an
association between prenatal exposure to traffic-related pollution and
reduced fetal growth. Independent of its effect on fetal growth, higher
neighborhood traffic density was also associated with higher odds of
obesity at 6 months.

Our finding of an association between higher prenatal air pollution and
reduced fetal growth is consistent with prior studies, including recent
meta-analyses, one which reported pooled effect estimates based on 62
studies[[#_ENREF_1][^{1}]] and another which reported a combined effect
estimate using data from 14 centers in 9 countries [International
Collaboration on Air Pollution and Pregnancy Outcomes
(ICAPPO)].[[#_ENREF_2][^{2}]] The majority of prior studies used
administrative birth record data which is often limited by the inability
to consider individual-level sociodemographic characteristics that could
confound the association between air pollution exposure and pregnancy
outcomes.[[#_ENREF_1][^{1}]] In our study, we were able to take into
account well-specified sociodemographic information obtained by
in-person interview and questionnaire. Yet, we still demonstrated fairly
large associations between prenatal BC and traffic density exposures and
early growth. For example, infants in the highest (vs. lowest) quartile
of third trimester BC exposure had an adjusted mean 0.16 units lower
(95% CI: -0.28, -0.05) birth weight-for-gestational age z-score. For an
infant born at 40 weeks gestation at the 50^{th} percentile for birth
weight, this difference would translate to a birth weight that would be
7 percentiles (95% CI: 2,11) or 66 g (95% CI: 21, 120)
lower.[[#_ENREF_15][^{15}]] While this difference is smaller than the
175-200g decrease in birth weight associated with maternal
smoking,[[#_ENREF_20][^{20}]] it is larger than the 20-40g decrease in
birth weight typically associated with a 20 Âµg/m^{3} increase in PM_{10}
or PM_{2.5}.[[#_ENREF_1][^{1}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_2][^{2}]] Our larger
effect estimates may reflect more precise exposure estimates as a result
of using a well-specified spatiotemporal land use regression BC model.
48 of 62 prior studies of air pollution and fetal growth reviewed by
Stieb, et al, measured exposures at a centrally-located
monitor.[[#_ENREF_1][^{1}]]

Despite the fact that most prior studies of air pollution and fetal
growth have focused on PM_{2.5}, we demonstrated stronger associations
with traffic density and distance to roadway, both proxies for
traffic-related pollution, and with BC, a traffic-related constituent of
PM_{2.5}, than with PM_{2.5} itself. Our findings are consistent with a
study of birth weight in full term infants in Atlanta, Georgia which
demonstrated a stronger association with exposure to BC versus PM_{2.5}
during the 3^{rd} trimester [-7.1g (95% CI: -13.9, -0.3) vs. -4.3g (95%
CI: -9.8, 1.2) per interquartile range increase in
pollutant].[[#_ENREF_21][^{21}]] However, women in Vancouver, British
Columbia, had similar odds of having a small-for-gestational age infant
[1.01 (95% CI: 0.99, 1.03) vs. 1.02 (95% CI: 1.00, 1.03) per
interquartile range increase in pollutant] when considering prenatal
exposure to BC versus PM_{2.5}.[[#_ENREF_22][^{22}]] Also, a more
pronounced BC effect as compared to PM_{2.5} has not been observed for
other outcomes such as all-cause or cardiorespiratory
mortality.[[#_ENREF_23][^{23}]] Our findings could reflect the fact that
we used a land use regression model exactly matched to a subject's
residential address to estimate BC exposure, whereas we used an aerosol
optical depth model to estimate PM_{2.5} exposure in 10 x 10 km blocks.
Also, sample sizes were smaller for analyses of PM_{2.5} exposure which
may have limited our power to see an association. Additional studies are
needed to determine whether BC and other traffic-related pollutants may
be more strongly associated with fetal growth than air pollution from
other sources.

In the present study, we considered PM_{2.5} and BC exposure during each
trimester separately, and associations between higher air pollution
exposure and reduced fetal growth were similar across the trimesters.
This is likely at least partially due to strong correlations between
trimester-specific exposures in our cohort. Prior studies of air
polluÂ­tion and birth weight have similarly attempted to identify
gestational windows of vulnerability with conflicting results (e.g.
first,[[#_ENREF_24][^{24}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_25][^{25}]]
second,[[#_ENREF_26][^{26}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_27][^{27}]] and
third[[#_ENREF_21][^{21}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_25][^{25}]]^{,}
[[#_ENREF_27][^{27}]] trimesters identified as vulnerable windows).
Consistent with our finding, the recent ICAPPO combined effects
meta-analysis found a slightly increased and comparable relative risk of
term low birth weight in each of the trimesters.[[#_ENREF_2][^{2}]]
Identifying gestational windows of vulnerability would inform policy
measures related to air pollution exposure during pregnancy but will
continue to be limited by correlations between exposures.

Mechanistically, air pollution may impact fetal growth by causing
placental inflammation and impaired function. In rodent models, greater
exposure to traffic-related air pollution during pregnancy was
associated with increased placental pro-inflammatory
cytokines[[#_ENREF_28][^{28}]] and altered functional
morphology.[[#_ENREF_29][^{29}]] In a study of pregnant women, greater
PM_{10} and NO_{2} exposure during the 2 months prior to delivery was
associated with lower placental weight as well as higher antiangiogenic
and lower angiogenic factors in cord blood.[[#_ENREF_30][^{30}]]

While its relationship with restricted fetal growth has been fairly
well-established, the extent to which prenatal air pollution exposure
may impact growth during childhood is unclear. In the present study,
higher neighborhood traffic density at a mother's residential address in
late pregnancy was associated with increased odds that her child would
be obese at 6 months of age. This association was independent of effects
of traffic on fetal growth. We were unable to elucidate the extent to
which the association between traffic density and infant obesity was
driven by traffic exposure prenatally vs. in early life. This was
because we measured neighborhood traffic density from a 2002 road
inventory, so it varied by residential address but did not vary over
time and because mothers in our cohort moved relatively infrequently.

Our BC and PM_{2.5} models, however, were able to measure daily
residential exposures, which enabled unique trimester-specific and 0-6
month postnatal exposure estimates. Prenatal and early life BC exposures
appeared to be associated with postnatal weight gain from 0-6 months of
age and obesity at 6 months of age. Effect estimates were consistently
highest for third trimester exposures, suggesting that late pregnancy,
when the majority of fetal growth occurs,[[#_ENREF_31][^{31}]] may
indeed be a vulnerable window for exposure as compared to early
pregnancy or postnatally. However, confidence intervals included the
null in all adjusted models. The sample size for all postnatal growth
models was substantially smaller (by about half) compared to the fetal
growth models, and it is possible that associations, especially for
third trimester BC exposure, would have reached significance with a
larger sample size. As was the case for fetal growth, the association
between BC and other direct measures of traffic (traffic density and
distance to roadway) with infant weight gain was generally stronger than
for PM_{2.5}.

Our results are in line with other human population-based studies that
have demonstrated an association between prenatal exposure to tobacco
smoke, a source of particulate matter, and offspring weight
gain[[#_ENREF_9][^{9}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_32][^{32}]] and between prenatal
exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, another air pollutant, and
obesity at 5 years of age.[[#_ENREF_10][^{10}]] Mechanistically, air
pollution may induce obesity by causing adipose tissue inflammation and
hypertrophy. In adult rats, exposure to air pollution increased visceral
adipocyte hypertrophy by altering the pro-inflammatory to
anti-inflammatory ratio in adipose tissue
macrophages.[[#_ENREF_11][^{11}]] Air pollution-induced
neuroinflammation may also lead to obesity through brain remodeling and
altered satiety signals. Among mice fed a high fat diet, those exposed
to diesel exhaust prenatally had greater brain microglial activation and
body weight as compared to unexposed mice.[[#_ENREF_33][^{33}]] Future
studies will be necessary to confirm an association between prenatal
traffic-related pollution and infant weight gain/obesity, further
evaluate windows of vulnerability, and elucidate mechanistic
underpinnings.

There is growing evidence that antenatal stressors (e.g. poor maternal
nutrition) associated with reduced fetal growth may predispose offspring
to glucose intolerance and obesity later in
life.[[#_ENREF_34][^{34}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_35][^{35}]] In addition, rapid
infant weight gain has been associated with increased risk for later
life obesity[[#_ENREF_36][^{36}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_37][^{37}]] and other
cardiovascular disease risk factors, such as increased central
adiposity[[#_ENREF_38][^{38}]] and elevated blood
pressure.[[#_ENREF_7][^{7}]]^{,} [[#_ENREF_38][^{38}]] A history of
reduced fetal growth in conjunction with rapid infant weight gain may
further exacerbate cardiometabolic disease risk. For example, in a
rodent model of IUGR, rats fed a low protein diet in infancy had
improved insulin sensitivity as compared to those fed a normal protein
diet,[[#_ENREF_8][^{8}]] and in our cohort, infants in the lowest
quartile of fetal growth and highest quartile of WFL z-score at 6 months
of age had the highest blood pressures at 3 years of
age.[[#_ENREF_7][^{7}]] Thus, the extent to which air pollution exposure
may be associated with the phenotype of reduced fetal growth and rapid
infant weight gain in the same individual has important health
implications. In the present study, infants in the lowest quartile of
fetal growth and highest quartile of WFL gain from 0-6 months of age had
higher prenatal exposure to traffic-related pollution than infants
without restricted fetal growth or rapid postnatal weight gain. Further
studies in this cohort and others will help to elucidate whether this
translates to an adverse cardiometabolic profile later in life.

Strengths of our study included use of a large, prospective cohort with
several measures of air pollution exposure and inclusion of multiple
potential confounding variables. Our well-specified spatiotemporal BC
land use regression model and our use of a birth weight-for-gestational
age z-score outcome were particular strengths. Limitations of the study
included lack of information on mother's time-activity patterns which
may have reduced the accuracy of the air pollution models and biased
results toward the null.[[#_ENREF_39][^{39}]] Also, generalizability may
be limited as mothers in our cohort were generally well educated and
mostly white, although the proportions of racial/ethnic minorities in
Project Viva were higher than in Massachusetts as a whole, according to
the 2000 census.[[#_ENREF_40][^{40}]]

*CONCLUSION*

Third trimester BC exposure and neighborhood traffic density in late
pregnancy predicted reduced fetal growth in Boston-area infants.
Neighborhood traffic density was also associated with greater obesity in
infancy. Additional studies are necessary to determine the extent to
which this pattern may contribute to future cardiovascular disease risk.

*\\
*

*ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS*

We thank Wei Perng, PhD, for helpful input regarding statistical
modeling.

*REFERENCES*

*1.* Stieb DM, Chen L, Eshoul M, Judek S. Ambient air pollution, birth
weight and preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
/Environ Res./ Aug 2012;117:100-111.

*2.* Dadvand P, Parker J, Bell ML, et al. Maternal exposure to
particulate air pollution and term birth weight: a multi-country
evaluation of effect and heterogeneity. /Environ Health Perspect./ Mar
2013;121(3):267-373.

*3.* Anderson JO, Thundiyil JG, Stolbach A. Clearing the air: a review
of the effects of particulate matter air pollution on human health. /J
Med Toxicol./ Jun 2012;8(2):166-175.

*4.* Alexeeff SE, Coull BA, Gryparis A, et al. Medium-term exposure to
traffic-related air pollution and markers of inflammation and
endothelial function. /Environ Health Perspect./ Apr
2011;119(4):481-486.

*5.* Lee PC, Talbott EO, Roberts JM, Catov JM, Sharma RK, Ritz B.
Particulate air pollution exposure and C-reactive protein during early
pregnancy. /Epidemiology./ Jul 2011;22(4):524-531.

*6.* Pallotto EK, Kilbride HW. Perinatal outcome and later implications
of intrauterine growth restriction. /Clin Obstet Gynecol./ Jun
2006;49(2):257-269.

*7.* Belfort MB, Rifas-Shiman SL, Rich-Edwards J, Kleinman KP, Gillman
MW. Size at birth, infant growth, and blood pressure at three years of
age. /J Pediatr./ Dec 2007;151(6):670-674.

*8.* Lim K, Armitage JA, Stefanidis A, Oldfield BJ, Black MJ. IUGR in
the absence of postnatal "catch-up" growth leads to improved whole body
insulin sensitivity in rat offspring. /Pediatr Res./ Oct
2011;70(4):339-344.

*9.* Oken E, Huh SY, Taveras EM, Rich-Edwards JW, Gillman MW.
Associations of maternal prenatal smoking with child adiposity and blood
pressure. /Obes Res./ Nov 2005;13(11):2021-2028.

*10.* Rundle A, Hoepner L, Hassoun A, et al. Association of childhood
obesity with maternal exposure to ambient air polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons during pregnancy. /Am J Epidemiol./ Jun 1
2012;175(11):1163-1172.

*11.* Sun Q, Yue P, Deiuliis JA, et al. Ambient air pollution
exaggerates adipose inflammation and insulin resistance in a mouse model
of diet-induced obesity. /Circulation./ Feb 3 2009;119(4):538-546.

*12.* Gillman MW, Rich-Edwards JW, Rifas-Shiman SL, Lieberman ES,
Kleinman KP, Lipshultz SE. Maternal age and other predictors of newborn
blood pressure. /J Pediatr./ Feb 2004;144(2):240-245.

*13.* Gryparis A, Coull B, Schwartz J, Suh H. Semiparametric latent
variable regression models for spatio-teomporal modeling of mobile
source particles in the greater Boston area /Journal of the Royal
Statistical Scoiety: Series C (Applied Statistics)/ 2007;56(2):183-209.

*14.* Kloog I, Koutrakis P, Coull B, Joo Lee H, Schwartz J. Assessing
temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological
studies using satellite aerosol optical depth measurements .
/Atmospheric Environment./ 2011;45:6267-6275.

*15.* Oken E, Kleinman KP, Rich-Edwards J, Gillman MW. A nearly
continuous measure of birth weight for gestational age using a United
States national reference. /BMC Pediatr./ Jul 8 2003;3:6.

*16.* National Center for Health Statistics. 2000 CDC growth charts:
United States. /Available at:/
[[http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/growthcharts/sas.htm][/www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/growthcharts/sas.htm/]]/./
Last accessed: March 8, 2014.

*17.* Benn RT. Some mathematical properties of weight-for-height indices
used as measures of adiposity. /Br J Prev Soc Med./ Feb
1971;25(1):42-50.

*18.* Fleisch AF, Gold DR, Rifas-Shiman SL, et al. Air Pollution
Exposure and Abnormal Glucose Tolerance during Pregnancy: The Project
Viva Cohort. /Environ Health Perspect./ Feb 7 2014.

*19.* Rubin DB. /Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys/.
Hoboken, N.J. ;: Wiley-Interscience; 2004.

*20.* Lumley J. Stopping smoking. /Br J Obstet Gynaecol./ Apr
1987;94(4):289-292.

*21.* Darrow LA, Klein M, Strickland MJ, Mulholland JA, Tolbert PE.
Ambient air pollution and birth weight in full-term infants in Atlanta,
1994-2004. /Environ Health Perspect./ May 2011;119(5):731-737.

*22.* Brauer M, Lencar C, Tamburic L, Koehoorn M, Demers P, Karr C. A
cohort study of traffic-related air pollution impacts on birth outcomes.
/Environ Health Perspect./ May 2008;116(5):680-686.

*23.* Hoek G, Krishnan RM, Beelen R, et al. Long-term air pollution
exposure and cardio- respiratory mortality: a review. /Environ Health./
May 28 2013;12(1):43.

*24.* Liu S, Krewski D, Shi Y, Chen Y, Burnett RT. Association between
gaseous ambient air pollutants and adverse pregnancy outcomes in
Vancouver, Canada. /Environ Health Perspect./ Nov
2003;111(14):1773-1778.

*25.* Rich DQ, Demissie K, Lu SE, Kamat L, Wartenberg D, Rhoads GG.
Ambient air pollutant concentrations during pregnancy and the risk of
fetal growth restriction. /J Epidemiol Community Health./ Jun
2009;63(6):488-496.

*26.* Lee BE, Ha EH, Park HS, et al. Exposure to air pollution during
different gestational phases contributes to risks of low birth weight.
/Hum Reprod./ Mar 2003;18(3):638-643.

*27.* Mannes T, Jalaludin B, Morgan G, Lincoln D, Sheppeard V, Corbett
S. Impact of ambient air pollution on birth weight in Sydney, Australia.
/Occup Environ Med./ Aug 2005;62(8):524-530.

*28.* Auten RL, Gilmour MI, Krantz QT, Potts EN, Mason SN, Foster WM.
Maternal diesel inhalation increases airway hyperreactivity in
ozone-exposed offspring. /Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol./ Apr
2012;46(4):454-460.

*29.* Veras MM, Damaceno-Rodrigues NR, Caldini EG, et al. Particulate
urban air pollution affects the functional morphology of mouse placenta.
/Biol Reprod./ Sep 2008;79(3):578-584.

*30.* van den Hooven EH, Pierik FH, de Kluizenaar Y, et al. Air
pollution exposure and markers of placental growth and function: the
generation R study. /Environ Health Perspect./ Dec
2012;120(12):1753-1759.

*31.* Cunningham FG, Williams JW. /Williams obstetrics/. 23rd ed. New
York: McGraw-Hill Medical; 2010.

*32.* Oken E, Levitan EB, Gillman MW. Maternal smoking during pregnancy
and child overweight: systematic review and meta-analysis. /Int J Obes
(Lond)./ Feb 2008;32(2):201-210.

*33.* Bolton JL, Smith SH, Huff NC, et al. Prenatal air pollution
exposure induces neuroinflammation and predisposes offspring to weight
gain in adulthood in a sex-specific manner. /FASEB J./ Nov
2012;26(11):4743-4754.

*34.* Gold DR. Do rapid infant growth and childhood asthma have common
developmental origins? /J Allergy Clin Immunol./ Jun
2013;131(6):1537-1538.

*35.* Roseboom T, de Rooij S, Painter R. The Dutch famine and its
long-term consequences for adult health. /Early Hum Dev./ Aug
2006;82(8):485-491.

*36.* Baird J, Fisher D, Lucas P, Kleijnen J, Roberts H, Law C. Being
big or growing fast: systematic review of size and growth in infancy and
later obesity. /BMJ./ Oct 22 2005;331(7522):929.

*37.* Taveras EM, Rifas-Shiman SL, Belfort MB, Kleinman KP, Oken E,
Gillman MW. Weight status in the first 6 months of life and obesity at 3
years of age. /Pediatrics./ Apr 2009;123(4):1177-1183.

*38.* Skilton MR, Marks GB, Ayer JG, et al. Weight gain in infancy and
vascular risk factors in later childhood. /Pediatrics./ Jun
2013;131(6):e1821-1828.

*39.* Nethery E, Leckie SE, Teschke K, Brauer M. From measures to
models: an evaluation of air pollution exposure assessment for
epidemiological studies of pregnant women. /Occup Environ Med./ Sep
2008;65(9):579-586.

*40.* United States Census Bureau. American Factfinder. Available:
[[http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml]]. 2000.
Last accessed: March 8, 2014

*\\
*

*Table 1.* Project Viva participant air pollution exposures.
Distributions and Spearman correlation coefficients.

|                                     | Distributions                      |
|-------------------------------------+------------------------------------+----------------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+---------------------------+------------------+------------------|
|                                     | /*\_\_\_\_BC\_(Âµg/m^{3})\_*\_\_/   | */\_\_PM_{2.5}\_(Âµg/m^{3})\_/*   | */Traffic density^{b}/*   | */Roadway distance/*^{c}   |
| *Exposure*                          | 1^{st} trimester                   | 2^{nd} trimester                 | 3^{rd} trimester          | 0-6 month postnatal^{a}    | 1^{st} trimester   | 2^{nd} trimester   | 3^{rd} trimester   | 0-6 month postnatal^{a}   | Late pregnancy   | Late pregnancy   |
| *N*                                 | 2,091                              | 2,085                            | 2,084                     | 1,160                      | 1,375              | 1,595              | 1,839              | 1,138                     | 2,099            | 2,112            |
| *Mean (SD) *                        | 0.8 (0.3)                          | 0.7(0.2)                         | 0.7 (0.2)                 | 0.7 (0.2)                  | 12.0 (1.6)         | 11.9 (1.4)         | 11.7 (1.6)         | 12.0 (0.8)                | 1,492 (2,093)    | 1,726 (1,891)    |
| *Minimum*                           | 0.1                                | 0.1                              | 0.1                       | 0.1                        | 8.4                | 8.5                | 7.5                | 9.2                       | 0                | 1                |
| *Maximum*                           | 4.1                                | 1.7                              | 1.6                       | 1.7                        | 16.1               | 15.9               | 16.8               | 14.0                      | 30,860           | 12,941           |
| Spearman correlation coefficients   |
|                                     | /*\_\_\_\_BC\_(Âµg/m^{3})\_*\_\_/   | */\_\_PM_{2.5}\_(Âµg/m^{3})\_/*   | */Traffic density^{b}/*   | */Roadway distance/*^{c}   |
| *Exposure*                          | 1^{st} trimester                   | 2^{nd} trimester                 | 3^{rd} trimester          | 0-6 month postnatal^{a}    | 1^{st} trimester   | 2^{nd} trimester   | 3^{rd} trimester   | 0-6 month postnatal^{a}   | Late pregnancy   | Late pregnancy   |
| *BC*                                |                                    |                                  |                           |                            |                    |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| 1^{st} trimester                    | 1                                  |                                  | Â                          |                            |                    |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| 2^{nd} trimester                    | 0.75                               | 1                                |                           |                            |                    |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| 3^{rd} trimester                    | 0.52                               | 0.67                             | 1                         |                            |                    |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| 0-6 month postnatal^{a}             | 0.80                               | 0.62                             | 0.66                      | 1                          |                    |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| *PM_{2.5}*                          |                                    |                                  |                           |                            |                    |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| 1^{st} trimester                    | 0.36                               | 0.58                             | 0.21                      | 0.26                       | 1                  |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| 2^{nd} trimester                    | 0.15                               | 0.39                             | 0.04                      | 0.21                       | -0.22              | 1                  |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| 3^{rd} trimester                    | 0.13                               | 0.40                             | 0.39                      | 0.15                       | 0.56               | -0.29              | 1                  |                           |                  |                  |
| 0-6 month postnatal^{a}             | 0.21                               | 0.17                             | 0.31                      | 0.39                       | -0.04              | 0.08               | 0.16               | 1                         |                  |                  |
| *Traffic density *                  |                                    |                                  |                           |                            |                    |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| Late pregnancy                      | 0.48                               | 0.48                             | 0.52                      | 0.59                       | 0.17               | 0.17               | 0.14               | 0.24                      | 1                |                  |
| *Distance to roadway *              |                                    |                                  |                           |                            |                    |                    |                    |                           |                  |                  |
| Late pregnancy                      | -0.33                              | -0.32                            | -0.34                     | -0.37                      | -0.12              | -0.12              | -0.11              | -0.26                     | -0.37            | 1                |

*Vehicles/day x km of road within 100 m of residential address

â Meters to nearest major roadway based on residential address

â¡Of 1,175 subjects with a 6 month outcome measure

| *Table 2.* Characteristics of 2,115 Project Viva mother-child pairs overall and by 3^{rd} trimester BC exposure.                                                                                             |                               |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------+---------------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                              | *--------No imputation----*   | *-----------------------Imputed covariates------------------------*   |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                               |                                                                       |               | *3rd trimester BC (Âµg/m^{3})*   |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                               |                                                                       | *Total*       | *Quartile 1*                    | *Q 2*         | *Q 3*         | *Q4*          |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                               |                                                                       |               |                                 |               |               |               |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                               |                                                                       | 0.69 (0.24)   | 0.40 (0.09)                     | 0.60 (0.04)   | 0.76 (0.05)   | 1.01 (0.15)   |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                              | *N*                           | *Mean (SD) or %*                                                      | *Mean or %*   |
| *Maternal age at enrollment (years)*                                                                                                                                                                         | 2,115                         | 31.8 (5.2)                                                            | 31.8 (5.2)    | 32.8                            | 32.3          | 31.4          | 30.8          |
| *Prepregnancy BMI (kg/m^{2})*                                                                                                                                                                                | 2,100                         | 24.9 (5.6)                                                            | 24.9 (5.6)    | 24.6                            | 24.9          | 24.6          | 25.4          |
| *Pregnancy weight gain (kg)*                                                                                                                                                                                 | 2,055                         | 15.5 (5.7)                                                            | 15.5 (5.7)    | 16.2                            | 15.3          | 15.1          | 15.5          |
| *College graduate (%)*                                                                                                                                                                                       | 2,091                         | 64.5                                                                  | 64.5          | 75.9                            | 66.3          | 63            | 53.1          |
| *Household income >$70,000/year (%)*                                                                                                                                                                         | 1,863                         | 61.2                                                                  | 57.8          | 76                              | 63.8          | 49.2          | 42.9          |
| *Race/ethnicity (%)*                                                                                                                                                                                         | 2,091                         |                                                                       |               |                                 |               |               |               |
| White                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                               | 66.6                                                                  | 66.5          | 87                              | 70.9          | 58.5          | 49.6          |
| Black                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                               | 16.5                                                                  | 16.5          | 5                               | 14.2          | 22.4          | 24.6          |
| Hispanic                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                               | 7.3                                                                   | 7.3           | 2.3                             | 6.7           | 6.7           | 13.1          |
| Asian                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                               | 5.7                                                                   | 5.8           | 4.3                             | 6             | 6.7           | 6.2           |
| Other                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                               | 3.9                                                                   | 4.0           | 1.4                             | 2.1           | 5.7           | 6.5           |
| *Smoking habits (%)*                                                                                                                                                                                         | 2,094                         |                                                                       |               |                                 |               |               |               |
| Never                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                               | 68.3                                                                  | 68.3          | 66.9                            | 67.9          | 69.7          | 68.6          |
| Former                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                               | 19.0                                                                  | 19.0          | 23.7                            | 19            | 17.6          | 16.4          |
| During pregnancy                                                                                                                                                                                             |                               | 12.7                                                                  | 12.7          | 9.4                             | 13.2          | 12.7          | 15            |
| *Glucose tolerance (%)*                                                                                                                                                                                      | 2,115                         |                                                                       |               |                                 |               |               |               |
| Normal                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                               | 82.6                                                                  | 82.5          | 81.5                            | 81.4          | 85            | 81.8          |
| Failed GCT, normal OGTT                                                                                                                                                                                      |                               | 8.6                                                                   | 8.6           | 11.1                            | 8.5           | 6.7           | 8.2           |
| IGT                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                               | 3.1                                                                   | 3.1           | 2.7                             | 3             | 3.3           | 3.6           |
| GDM                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                               | 5.7                                                                   | 5.8           | 4.7                             | 7.1           | 5             | 6.4           |
| *Paternal BMI*                                                                                                                                                                                               | 2,000                         | 26.4 (4.1)                                                            | 26.4 (4.1)    | 26.6                            | 26.3          | 26.4          | 26.3          |
| *Infant gestational age (weeks)*                                                                                                                                                                             | 2,115                         | 39.4 (1.9)                                                            | 39.4 (1.9)    | 39.5                            | 39.4          | 39.5          | 39.5          |
| *Birth weight for gestational age z-score*                                                                                                                                                                   | 2,114                         | 0.17 (0.97)                                                           |               | 0.31                            | 0.19          | 0.19          | 0.00          |
| *Change in WFL-z 0-6 months*                                                                                                                                                                                 | 689                           | 0.23 (1.11)                                                           |               | 0.15                            | 0.24          | 0.19          | 0.33          |
| *Change in WFA-z 0-6 months*                                                                                                                                                                                 | 1,172                         | 0.27 (1.11)                                                           |               | 0.18                            | 0.27          | 0.23          | 0.39          |
| *Obesity at 6 months (%)*                                                                                                                                                                                    | 1,153                         | 16.7                                                                  |               | 14.8                            | 14.2          | 19.2          | 19.4          |
| Abbreviations: GCT: Glucose tolerance test; OGTT: Oral glucose tolerance test; WFL-z: weight-for-length z-score; WFA-z: weight-for-age z-score; obesity (WFL â¥95^{th} percentile vs. < 85^{th} percentile)   |

*\\
Table 3.* Adjusted associations of air pollution exposure with birth
weight for gestational age z-score (fetal growth), change in
weight-for-length z-score from 0-6 months, change in weight-for-age
z-score from 0-6 months, and obesity at 6 months

| *Estimate (95% CI) of fetal growth^{a}*                                       |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------+-------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+------------------------|
| *Exposure*                                                                    | *N*     | *Quartile 1*      | *Quartile 2*          | *Quartile 3*          | *Quartile 4*           |
|                                                                               |         |                   |                       |                       |                        |
|                                                                               |         | *(lowest)*        |                       |                       | *(highest)*            |
| 1^{st} trimester BC                                                           | 2,090   | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.07 (-0.18, 0.04)   | -0.11 (-0.22, 0.00)   | -0.15 (-0.27,-0.03)    |
| 2^{nd} trimester BC                                                           | 2,084   | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.03 (-0.14, 0.09)   | -0.06 (-0.17, 0.05)   | -0.14 (-0.26, -0.03)   |
| 3^{rd} trimester BC                                                           | 2,083   | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.03 (-0.14, 0.09)   | 0.03 (-0.08, 0.15)    | -0.16 (-0.28,-0.05)    |
| Late pregnancy traffic density                                                | 2,098   | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.05 (-0.16, 0.06)   | -0.07 (-0.18, 0.04)   | -0.14 (-0.25,-0.03)    |
| *Exposure*                                                                    |         | *â¥ 200m*          | *â¥100m, <200m*Â        | *â¥50m, <100m*Â         | *<50m*                 |
| Late pregnancy roadway proximity                                              | 2,111   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.09 (-0.08, 0.26)    | -0.09 (-0.33, 0.14)   | -0.30 (-0.51, 0.08)    |
| *Change in weight-for-length z-score birth to 6 months of age (95% CI)^{b}*   |
| *Exposure*                                                                    | *N*     | *Quartile 1*      | *Quartile 2*          | *Quartile 3*          | *Quartile 4*           |
|                                                                               |         |                   |                       |                       |                        |
|                                                                               |         | *(lowest)*        |                       |                       | *(highest)*            |
| 1^{st} trimester BC                                                           | 684     | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.18 (-0.05, 0.40)    | 0.01 (-0.22, 0.24)    | -0.01 (-0.26, 0.23)    |
| 2^{nd} trimester BC                                                           | 682     | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.14 (-0.37, 0.09)   | -0.04 (-0.27, 0.20)   | 0.00 (-0.25, 0.25)     |
| 3^{rd} trimester BC                                                           | 684     | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.07 (-0.16, 0.30)    | 0.07 (-0.17, 0.30)    | 0.15 (-0.10, 0.39)     |
| 0-6 month postnatal BC                                                        | 682     | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.04 (-0.19, 0.27)    | 0.00 (-0.24, 0.24)    | 0.06 (-0.18, 0.30)     |
| Late pregnancy traffic density                                                | 687     | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.24 (0.01, 0.47)     | 0.20 (-0.04, 0.43)    | 0.17 (-0.06, 0.41)     |
| *Exposure*                                                                    |         | *â¥200m*           | *â¥100m, <200m*Â        | *â¥50m, <100m*Â         | *<50m*                 |
| Late pregnancy roadway proximity                                              | 688     | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.00 (-0.33, 0.33)    | 0.15 (-0.34, 0.64)    | 0.16 (-0.32, 0.64)     |
| *Change in weight-for-age z-score birth to 6 months of age (95% CI)^{b}*      |
| *Exposure*                                                                    | *N*     | *Quartile 1*      | *Quartile 2*          | *Quartile 3*          | *Quartile 4*           |
|                                                                               |         |                   |                       |                       |                        |
|                                                                               |         | *(lowest)*        |                       |                       | *(highest)*            |
| 1^{st} trimester BC                                                           | 1,161   | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.03 (-0.18, 0.11)   | -0.06 (-0.20, 0.09)   | -0.01 (-0.16, 0.14)    |
| 2^{nd} trimester BC                                                           | 1,159   | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.11 (-0.25, 0.04)   | -0.04 (-0.18, 0.11)   | 0.03 (-0.12, 0.18)     |
| 3^{rd} trimester BC                                                           | 1,162   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.05 (-0.10, 0.19)    | -0.01 (-0.16, 0.14)   | 0.05 (-0.10, 0.20)     |
| 0-6 month postnatal BC                                                        | 1,157   | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.04 (-0.18, 0.10)   | -0.03 (-0.18, 0.12)   | -0.03 (-0.18, 0.12)    |
| Late pregnancy traffic density                                                | 1,167   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.14 (-0.00, 0.29)    | 0.01 (-0.14, 0.16)    | 0.14 (-0.01, 0.29)     |
| *Exposure*                                                                    |         | *â¥200m*           | *â¥100m, <200m*Â        | *â¥50m, <100m*Â         | *<50m*                 |
| Late pregnancy roadway proximity                                              | 1,171   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.08 (-0.14, 0.29)    | 0.30 (0.01, 0.59)     | 0.03 (-0.26, 0.32)     |
| *Odds Ratio (95% CI) for obesity vs. normal weight at 6 months of age^{b}*    |
| *Exposure*                                                                    | *N*     | *Quartile 1*      | *Quartile 2*          | *Quartile 3*          | *Quartile 4*           |
|                                                                               |         |                   |                       |                       |                        |
|                                                                               |         | *(lowest)*        |                       |                       | *(highest)*            |
| 1^{st} trimester BC                                                           | 1,142   | 1.0 (Reference)   | 0.96 (0.60, 1.53)     | 1.07 (0.66, 1.74)     | 1.33 (0.83, 2.15)      |
| 2^{nd} trimester BC                                                           | 1,140   | 1.0 (Reference)   | 0.86 (0.54, 1.37)     | 0.89 (0.56, 1.41)     | 1.01 (0.63, 1.62)      |
| 3^{rd} trimester BC                                                           | 1,143   | 1.0 (Reference)   | 1.13 (0.69, 1.84)     | 1.64 (1.02, 2.64)     | 1.60 (0.98, 2.61)      |
| 0-6 month postnatal BC                                                        | 1,139   | 1.0 (Reference)   | 0.77 (0.47, 1.24)     | 0.99 (0.61, 1.59)     | 1.50 (0.94, 2.40)      |
| Late pregnancy traffic density                                                | 1,148   | 1.0 (Reference)   | 1.67 (1.03, 2.68)     | 1.11 (0.67, 1.83)     | 1.79 (1.10, 2.89)      |
| *Exposure*                                                                    |         | *â¥200m*           | *â¥100m, <200m*Â        | *â¥50m, <100m*Â         | *<50m*                 |
| Late pregnancy roadway proximity                                              | 1,152   | 1.0 (Reference)   | 0.92 (0.43, 1.97)     | 0.69 (0.23, 2.07)     | 1.71 (0.75, 3.90)      |

^{a}Adjusted for household income, paternal BMI, and maternal education,
race/ethnicity, prepregnancy BMI, gestational weight gain, gestational
diabetes, and smoking habits

^{b}Adjusted for above and infant birth weight-for-gestational age
z-score and gestational age

*Figure 1.* Adjusted associations of air pollution exposure with birth
weight for gestational age z-score (fetal growth) and with adds of
obesity at 6 months of age.

[[media/image1.emf]]

*Supplemental Material, Table S1*. Non-imputed characteristics of
participants with and without a 6 month follow-up visit.

|                                              | *6 month follow-up visit*   |                           |
|----------------------------------------------+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+----------|
| Â                                             | */\_\_\_\_With\_\_\_\_/*    | */\_\_\_Without\_\_\_/*   | */p-value/*   |
| *Â *                                          | *N*                         | *Mean (SD) or %*          | *N*           | *Mean (SD) or %*   |          |
| *Maternal age at enrollment (years)*         | 1,175                       | 32.4 *(*4.9)              | 940           | 31.1 *(*5.5)       | <0.001   |
| *Prepregnancy BMI (kg/m^{2})*                | 1,169                       | 24.6 *(*5.2)              | 931           | 25.3 *(*6.0)       | 0.01     |
| *Gestational weight gain (kg)*               | 1,148                       | 15.5 *(*5.5)              | 907           | 15.6 *(*5.9)       | 0.82     |
| *College graduate, %*                        | 1,173                       | 70.9                      | 918           | 56.4               | <0.001   |
| *Household income greater than $70,000, %*   | 1,086                       | 64.8                      | 777           | 56.1               | <0.001   |
| *Race/ethnicity, %*                          | 1,173                       |                           | 918           |                    | <0.001   |
| White                                        |                             | 72.5                      |               | 59.0               |          |
| Black                                        |                             | 12.3                      |               | 21.9               |          |
| Asian                                        |                             | 5.3                       |               | 6.3                |          |
| Hispanic                                     |                             | 6.0                       |               | 8.9                |          |
| Other                                        |                             | 4.0                       |               | 3.8                |          |
| *Smoking habits, %*                          | 1,169                       |                           | 925           |                    | <0.001   |
| Never                                        |                             | 69.7                      |               | 66.6               |          |
| Former                                       |                             | 20.5                      |               | 17.0               |          |
| During pregnancy                             |                             | 9.8                       |               | 16.4               |          |
| *Glucose tolerance, %*                       | 1,156                       |                           | 900           |                    | 0.36     |
| GDM                                          |                             | 5.0                       |               | 6.6                |          |
| IGT                                          |                             | 3.2                       |               | 3.0                |          |
| Failed GCT/normal OGTT                       |                             | 8.1                       |               | 9.2                |          |
| Normal                                       |                             | 83.7                      |               | 81.2               |          |
| *Paternal BMI (kg/m^{2})*                    | 1,130                       | 26.4 (4.1)                | 870           | 26.5 (4.1)         | 0.54     |
| *Infant gestational age*                     | 1,175                       | 39.5 *(*1.8)              | 940           | 39.3 *(*2.1)       | 0.006    |
| *Birthweight for-gestational-age z-score*    | 1,174                       | 0.2 *(*1.0)               | 940           | 0.1 *(*1.0)        | 0.04     |
| *1^{st} trimester BC (Î¼g/m^{3})*             | 1,164                       | 0.7 *(*0.2)               | 927           | 0.8 *(*0.3)        | 0.01     |
| *2^{nd} trimester BC (Î¼g/m^{3})*             | 1,162                       | 0.7 (0.2)                 | 923           | 0.7 (0.3)          | 0.17     |
| *3^{rd} trimester BC (Î¼g/m^{3})*             | 1,165                       | 0.7 *(*0.2)               | 919           | 0.7 *(*0.2)        | 0.43     |
| *1^{st} trimester PM_{2.5} (Î¼g/m^{3})*       | 824                         | 12.0 (1.6)                | 551           | 11.9 (1.5)         | 0.14     |
| *2^{nd} trimester PM_{2.5} (Î¼g/m^{3})*       | 929                         | 11.9 (1.4)                | 666           | 11.8 (1.4)         | 0.08     |
| *3^{rd} trimester PM_{2.5} (Î¼g/m^{3})*       | 1,042                       | 11.8 (1.6)                | 797           | 11.7 (1.6)         | 0.15     |
| *Late pregnancy traffic density^{a}*         | 1,170                       | 1,475 *(*1,975)           | 929           | 1,514 *(*2,233)    | 0.67     |
| *Late pregnancy roadway proximity, %*        | 1,174                       |                           | 938           |                    | 0.74     |
| â¥ 200 m                                      |                             | 87.7                      |               | 87.9               |          |
| â¥ 100 m and < 200 m                          |                             | 6.0                       |               | 6.0                |          |
| â¥ 50 m and < 100 m                           |                             | 3.2                       |               | 2.5                |          |
| < 50 m                                       |                             | 3.2                       |               | 3.7                |          |

^{a}Vehicles/day x km of road within 100 m of residential address

*Supplemental Material, Table S2.* Adjusted associations of PM_{2.5}
exposure with birth weight for gestational age z-score (fetal growth),
change in weight-for-length from 0-6 months, change in weight-for-age
z-score from 0- 6 months, and obesity at 6 months

| *Estimate (95% CI) of fetal growth^{a}*                                       |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+-------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------|
| *Exposure*                                                                    | *N*    | *Quartile 1*      | *Quartile 2*          | *Quartile 3*          | *Quartile 4*          |
|                                                                               |        |                   |                       |                       |                       |
|                                                                               |        | *(lowest)*        |                       |                       | *(highest)*           |
| 1^{st} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 1374   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.04 (-0.07, 0.15)    | -0.06 (-0.17, 0.05)   | -0.08 (-0.19, 0.03)   |
| 2^{nd} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 1594   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.00 (-0.11, 0.11)    | 0.03 (-0.08, 0.14)    | -0.08 (-0.19, 0.03)   |
| 3^{rd} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 1838   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.00 (-0.10, 0.11)    | 0.05 (-0.06, 0.16)    | -0.05 (-0.16, 0.06)   |
| *Change in weight-for-length z-score birth to 6 months of age (95% CI)^{b}*   |
| *Exposure*                                                                    | *N*    | *Quartile 1*      | *Quartile 2*          | *Quartile 3*          | *Quartile 4*          |
|                                                                               |        |                   |                       |                       |                       |
|                                                                               |        | *(lowest)*        |                       |                       | *(highest)*           |
| 1^{st} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 507    | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.05 (-0.29, 0.19)   | 0.12 (-0.11, 0.34)    | 0.15 (-0.07, 0.37)    |
| 2^{nd} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 522    | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.11 (-0.13, 0.34)    | 0.09 (-0.13, 0.31)    | 0.06 (-0.16, 0.28)    |
| 3^{rd} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 617    | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.17 (-0.06, 0.40)    | 0.22 (-0.01, 0.44)    | 0.17 (-0.06, 0.39)    |
| 0-6 month postnatal PM_{2.5}                                                  | 673    | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.15 (-0.08, 0.38)    | 0.21 (-0.02, 0.44)    | 0.22 (-0.02, 0.46)    |
| *Change in weight-for-age z-score birth to 6 months of age (95% CI)^{b}*      |
| *Exposure*                                                                    | *N*    | *Quartile 1*      | *Quartile 2*          | *Quartile 3*          | *Quartile 4*          |
|                                                                               |        |                   |                       |                       |                       |
|                                                                               |        | *(lowest)*        |                       |                       | *(highest)*           |
| 1^{st} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 821    | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.08 (-0.23, 0.07)   | 0.06 (-0.08, 0.21)    | -0.02 (-0.16, 0.12)   |
| 2^{nd} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 926    | 0.0 (Reference)   | -0.08 (-0.22, 0.06)   | -0.03 (-0.18, 0.11)   | -0.04 (-0.18, 0.10)   |
| 3^{rd} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 1039   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.04 (-0.10, 0.19)    | 0.03 (-0.12, 0.17)    | 0.05 (-0.09, 0.18)    |
| 0-6 month postnatal PM_{2.5}                                                  | 1135   | 0.0 (Reference)   | 0.11 (-0.03, 0.26)    | 0.11 (-0.04, 0.26)    | 0.02 (-0.13, 0.16)    |
| *Odds Ratio (95% CI) for obesity vs. normal weight at 6 months of age^{b}*    |
| *Exposure*                                                                    | *N*    | *Quartile 1*      | *Quartile 2*          | *Quartile 3*          | *Quartile 4*          |
|                                                                               |        |                   |                       |                       |                       |
|                                                                               |        | *(lowest)*        |                       |                       | *(highest)*           |
| 1^{st} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 819    | 1.0 (Reference)   | 0.67 (0.41, 1.08)     | 0.79 (0.49, 1.26)     | 1.09 (0.70, 1.69)     |
| 2^{nd} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 923    | 1.0 (Reference)   | 0.84 (0.54, 1.32)     | 0.83 (0.53, 1.30)     | 0.73 (0.46, 1.17)     |
| 3^{rd} trimester PM_{2.5}                                                     | 1030   | 1.0 (Reference)   | 0.95 (0.59, 1.50)     | 1.23 (0.79, 1.93)     | 1.13 (0.72, 1.76)     |
| 0-6 month postnatal PM_{2.5}                                                  | 1122   | 1.0 (Reference)   | 0.95 (0.60, 1.51)     | 1.00 (0.63, 1.60)     | 1.18 (0.74, 1.86)     |

^{a}Adjusted for household income, paternal BMI, and maternal education,
race/ethnicity, prepregnancy BMI, gestational weight gain, gestational
diabetes, and smoking habits

^{b}Adjusted for above and birth weight-for-gestational age z-score and
gestational age
