Authors' response The threshold of light at night (LAN) intensity,
believed to be necessary to suppress pineal melatonin production, has
been rapidly declining since 1980 when Lewy and colleagues first showed
that very bright light could do so (Lewy et al., 1980). Until the
publication of their paper in Science, it was thought that humans were
refractory to any light-induced melatonin suppression. The pioneering
work of Brainard and colleagues (2001) has given detail on the human
light response, and most recently Gooley et al. (2010) have shown that
bedroom illumination typical of most homes in the evening can
substantially reduce and delay melatonin production. The question
becomes, whether do light levels after a woman has “gone to sleep” have
an effect? There are two aspects of eyelids and light exposure during
the sleep period pertinent to the interpretation of our results. There
is evidence that bright light can lower melatonin in some persons even
through closed eyelids (Hätönen et al., 1999), but more importantly
eyelids are not closed immediately after a person goes to sleep, and nor
do they remain tightly closed throughout the entire nighttime period.
Most of us are awake for periods during the night, which is normal and
healthy (Wehr, 1992), and sometimes one awakens to empty the bladder,
and with increasing in frequency with each passing year. Our results are
consistent with results of several other studies “implicating” bedroom
light level at night and risk of breast cancer (BC) in women (cf. Davis
et al., 2001; Li et al., 2010; O'Leary et al., 2006). Although all
case-control studies can be subject to potential recall bias, such a
bias is potentially a differential error in the subject's recall of
bedroom light level. These inaccuracies would tend to drive the
estimated odds ratios either away from the null or toward the null, and
not necessarily in one particular direction. However, we do not have any
particular reason to think that “cases” and “controls” in our study
(Kloog et al., 2011) were

differently prone to a systematic error in recalling bedroom light
levels, which is a necessary precondition for a “recall bias” to occur.
Most people sleep with their eyelids closed. The women who participated
in our survey are unlikely to be different. An important outcome
stemming from the results of our study is thus related to the fact that
even such “closed-eyes sleepers” tended to show a positive association
between bedroom LAN exposure and BC risk, which we detected in our
study. As mentioned in the article, all women residing in Northern
Israel and diagnosed with BC since 2000 were invited to participate in a
general study. Questions on LAN exposure were added to the general study
questionnaire (described in detail in Rennert et al., 2010) in mid-2006,
and our study covers all the 1679 women (794 cases and 885 controls) who
responded to the “extended” questionnaire between 2006 and 2008. One
clarification is required. The odds ratio of 1.22 reported in our
logistic regression model is for each step from bedroom light level
category 1 to level category 4, so that the estimated odds ratio
comparing the brightest (category 4) to the darkest (category 1) is
about 1.82, and is highly statistically significant. Even if we adopt a
more “conservative” approach to the relative risk estimation, and track
changes in the predicted BC probabilities, by keeping all other
predictors constant at their average levels, and adjusting only bedroom
light intensities, we obtain an about 50% increase in BC relative risk,
associated with a transition from a dark sleeping environment to a
brightly lit one. Importantly, in the adjusted analyses, neither
shutters nor television were significant at the accepted significance
level (p < .05). We cannot thus confidently say anything about their
actual association with BC risk, as clearly stated in the paper. As we
also stated in the paper, the novelty of our study lies in the fact
that, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first large-scale
case-control study of the general population that identified a
significant positive

Address correspondence to Prof. Abraham Haim, The Israeli Center for
Interdisciplinary Research in Chronobiology University of Haifa, Mount
Carmel, Haifa, Israel 31905; tel: 972-4-8288784, E-mail:
ahaim@research.haifa.ac.il





A. Haim et al.

association between bedroom light (sleeping habitat) and environmental
nighttime light (light pollution) levels with BC risk, providing
evidence that the relative risk of BC appears to increase in more
illuminated sleeping environments. Characteristically two other similar
studies (Li et al., 2010; O'Leary et al., 2006) did not detect a
statistically significant association between LAN and BC risk. The
omitted variable bias is a problem commonly faced by epidemiological
studies, in which the “wish list” of explanatory factors is often
“trimmed” by data availability and/or privacy considerations. Although
our analysis does not include all potential confounders, it includes, in
addition to LAN-related variables, which are of primary interest for our
inquiry, several important predictors, such as age, ethnicity, number of
births, and alcohol consumption, which make our data set fairly
parsimonious. Although in an epidemiological study it is difficult to
estimate accurately inter-factor dependencies, the possibility that
ambient light levels in the bedroom at night affect BC risk is
important. Before electricity, the night was dark, and even during a
full moon humans could shelter from any light, especially since it was
only for few nights every month and not every night. The modern world is
different, and rather few people sleep nowadays in complete darkness.
Even these low light levels might be a problem, as their effects can
accumulate and in such a case it is completely different from moon
light. Light pollution at this time is defined mainly by astronomers and
appears to be increasing. This process is mainly due to a massive
increase in short-wavelength illumination. We, thus, become more
vulnerable to short wavelengths that can even penetrate the integument
of a subterranean (“blind”) mole rat whose eyes are covered with an
integument, including fur, as found by Zubidat et al. (2010). According
to this study, both blind and sighted rodent species respond to
photophase light of different wavelengths. Therefore, eyelids may not be
“impassible” light barriers for illumination, though this topic may
require further study. It is also worth noting that our study deals with
an exposure of women to LAN for several hours each night, for many
nights, and not with an exposure to short light episodes, which are
usually used in laboratory experiments. Declaration of Interest: The
authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are
responsible for the content and writing of the paper.

Abraham Haim1,3, Itai Kloog1,4, Hedy S. Rennert2 and Boris A. Portnov1 1

Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Management, Graduate
School of Management, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, Israel,
2Department of Community Medicine and Epidemiology, Carmel Medical
Center and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-- Israel
Institute of Technology and Clalit Health Services National Cancer
Control Center, Haifa, Israel, 3The Israeli Center for Interdisciplinary
Research in Chronobiology, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa,
Israel, 4 Department of Environmental Health - Exposure, Epidemiology
and Risk Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Center,
Boston MA USA REFERENCES Brainard GC, Hanifin JP, Greeson JM, Byrne B,
Glickman G, Gerner E, Rollag MD. (2001). Action spectrum for melatonin
regulation in humans: evidence for a novel circadian photoreceptor. J.
Neurosci. 21:6405--6412. Davis S, Mirick DK, Stevens RG. (2001). Night
shift work, light at night, and risk of breast cancer. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 93:1557--1562. Gooley JJ, Chamberlain K, Smith KA, Khalsa SB,
Rajaratnam SM, Van Reen E, Zeitzer JM, Czeisler CA, Lockley SW. (2011).
Exposure to room light before bedtime suppresses melatonin onset and
shortens melatonin duration in humans. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.
96:463--72. Hätönen T, Alila-Johansson A, Mustanoja S, Laakso ML.
(1999). Suppression of melatonin by 2000-lux light in humans with closed
eyelids. Biol. Psychiatry 46:827--831. Kloog I, Portnov BA, Rennert HS,
Haim A. (2011). Does the modern urbanized sleeping habitat pose a breast
cancer risk? Chronobiol. Int. 28:76--80. Lewy AJ, Wehr TA, Goodwin FK,
Newsome DA, Markey SP. (1980). Light suppresses melatonin secretion in
humans. Science 210:1267--1269. Li Q, Zheng T, Holford TR, Boyle P,
Zhang Y, Dai M. (2010). Light at night and breast cancer: results from a
population-based casecontrol study in Connecticut, USA. Cancer Causes
Control 21:2281--2285. O'Leary ES, Schoenfeld ER, Stevens RG, Kabat GC,
Henderson K, Grimson R, Gammon MD, Leske MC, Electromagnetic Fields and
Breast Cancer on Long Island Study Group. (2006). Shift work, light at
night, and breast cancer on Long Island, New York. Am. J. Epidemiol.
164:358--366. Rennert G, Pinchev M, Rennert HS. (2010). Use of
bisphosphonates and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer. J. Clin.
Oncol. 28:3577--3581. Wehr TA. (1992). In short photoperiods, human
sleep is biphasic. J. Sleep Res. 1:103--107. Zubidat AE, Randy J, Nelson
RJ, Haim A. (2010). Photoentrainment in blind and sighted rodent
species: responses to photophase light with different wavelengths. J.
Exp. Biol. 213:4213--4222.

Chronobiology International

Copyright of Chronobiology International: The Journal of Biological &
Medical Rhythm Research is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a
listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual
use.


