*Prenatal and Childhood* *Traffic-Related Pollution Exposure and
Childhood Cognition* *in the Project Viva Cohort (Massachusetts, USA)*

Maria H. Harris^{1}, Diane R. Gold^{2,3}, Sheryl L. Rifas-Shiman^{4},
Steven J. Melly^{3},

Antonella Zanobetti^{3}, Brent A. Coull^{5}, Joel D. Schwartz^{2,3},
Alexandros Gryparis^{6}, Itai Kloog^{3,7},

Petros Koutrakis^{3}, David C. Bellinger^{3,8}, Roberta F. White^{1},
Sharon K. Sagiv^{1,9}, Emily Oken^{4}

*Affiliations*

^{1}Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA

^{2}Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

^{3}Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA

^{4}Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School and
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston, MA, USA

^{5}Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA

^{6}Department of Hygiene, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics,
University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece

^{7}The Department of Geography and Environmental Development,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel

^{8}Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA

^{9}Division of Epidemiology, University of California, Berkeley School
of Public Health, Berkeley, CA, USA

*Corresponding author:*

Maria H Harris, SM

Department of Environmental Health

Boston University School of Public Health

715 Albany Street, Talbot 4 West

Boston, MA, 02118

Phone: 617-638-4620

[[mailto:mhharris@bu.edu][mhharris@bu.edu]]

*Running title:*

Traffic-related pollution and childhood cognition

*Acknowledgments:*

We thank the participants and staff of Project Viva, and Dr. Thomas
Webster for his critical review of the manuscript. The authors have
received support from the National Institutes of Health (R01AI102960,
R01HD034568, P01ES009825, P03ES000002, R37HD 034568, K24HD069408,
T32ES014562), the US Environmental Protection Agency (RD83479801,
RD83241601), Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard Pilgrim Health
Care Institute, and the Health Effects Institute.

This publication's contents are solely the responsibility of the grantee
and do not necessarily represent the official views of the US EPA.
Further, US EPA does not endorse the purchase of any commercial products
or services mentioned in the publication.

*Competing financial interests declaration:*

The authors have no competing financial interests.

*ABSTRACT*

*Background:* Influences of prenatal and early life exposures to air
pollution on cognition are not well-understood.

*Objectives:* Examine associations of gestational and childhood exposure
to traffic-related pollution with childhood cognition.

*Methods:* We studied 1,109 mother-child pairs in Project Viva, a
prospective birth cohort study in Eastern Massachusetts (USA). In
mid-childhood (mean age 8.0 years), we measured verbal and non-verbal
intelligence, visual motor abilities, and visual memory. For periods in
late pregnancy and childhood we estimated spatially and temporally
resolved black carbon (BC) and fine particulate matter (PM_{2.5})
exposures, residential proximity to major roadways, and near-residence
traffic density. We used linear regression models to examine
associations of exposures with cognitive test scores, adjusted for
potential confounders.

*Results:* Compared to children living ≥200 m from a major roadway at
birth, those living <50 m away had lower non-verbal IQ (-7.5 points; 95%
confidence interval (CI): -13.1, -1.9), and somewhat lower verbal IQ
(-3.8 points; 95% CI: -8.2, 0.6) and visual motor abilities (-5.3
points; 95% CI: -11.0, 0.4). Cross-sectional associations of major
roadway proximity and cognition at mid-childhood were weaker. Prenatal
and childhood exposure to traffic density and PM_{2.5} were not
associated with poorer cognitive performance. Third trimester and
childhood BC exposures were associated with lower verbal IQ in minimally
adjusted models, but after adjustment for socioeconomic covariates,
associations were attenuated or reversed.

*Conclusions:* Residential proximity to major roadways during gestation
and early-life may affect cognitive development. Influences of
pollutants and socioeconomic conditions on cognition may be difficult to
disentangle.

*INTRODUCTION*

Evidence supporting the hypothesis that outdoor air pollution affects
the brain was recently reviewed at a National Institutes of Health
workshop (Block et al 2012). Participating scientists concluded that
more studies were needed to define critical time windows for pollution
effects on cognition, assess factors related to vulnerability to outdoor
air pollution (e.g., age at exposure, stress, and socioeconomic status),
and define the relation of particle pollution composition to its
toxicity.

In a study of urban Boston children aged 8‒11 years, childhood exposure
to black carbon (BC), a marker of traffic pollution, was associated with
lower verbal IQ, non-verbal IQ, and visual memory abilities (Suglia et
al. 2008). Neither that study, nor recent cross-sectional reports of
associations between ambient air pollution exposure and reduced
cognitive performance (Calderón-Garcidueñas et al. 2011; Freire et al.
2010; Wang et al. 2009) examined pollution effects across different time
windows of development Exposures in late pregnancy to airborne
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) predicted lower cognitive
development at age 3 and lower IQ at age 5 in New York City (Perera et
al. 2006; Perera et al. 2009) and poorer non-verbal reasoning at age 5
in Krakow, Poland (Edwards et al. 2010). In a recent meta-analysis of
European birth cohorts, prenatal exposure to ambient air pollution was
associated with lower psychomotor development in children aged 1-6, but
not with cognitive development (Guxens et al. 2014). Postnatal exposures
were not measured in these studies.

We examined associations of child cognitive outcomes with exposure to
traffic-related air pollutants in late pregnancy and childhood. Exposure
was assessed in several ways: residential proximity to major roadways,
near-residence traffic density, and BC and fine particulate matter
(aerodynamic diameter ≤ 2.5 μm; PM_{2.5}) estimated at the residence
level. Because of the known vulnerability of the prenatal period to
neurodevelopmental toxicants (Bellinger 2013), we hypothesized that
pregnancy exposure would be more influential than childhood exposure.

*METHODS*

/*Study Population*/

We studied participants in Project Viva, a longitudinal cohort of 2,128
mother and child pairs enrolled during 1999‒2002 at mothers' initial
prenatal visits (median 9.9 weeks of gestation) at eight locations of
Harvard Vanguard Medical Associates, a multispecialty group practice in
urban and suburban Eastern Massachusetts. Study procedures for this
cohort have been described previously (Oken et al. 2014). Briefly, we
administered health and developmental assessments to mothers and
children at in-person visits and through mailed annual questionnaires.
1,110 children completed at least one cognitive assessment at a visit in
mid-childhood (mean age 8.0 years, 80% aged 7 or 8 at assessment). After
excluding participants lacking exposure information, final sample sizes
ranged from 960‒1,104 (depending on analysis), with 1,109 participants
included in at least one analysis. The Institutional Review Board of
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care approved the study. All mothers provided
written informed consent, and children provided verbal assent at the
mid-childhood visit

/*Major Roadway Proximity and Near-Residence Traffic Density*/

Mothers reported their residential addresses at study visits and on
annual questionnaires. We estimated residential proximity to nearest
major roadway and near-residence traffic density at birth and date of
the mid-childhood cognitive assessment. Using ArcGIS 10.1 with Street
MapTM North America (ESRI, Redlands, CA), aerial photographs, and
internet resources, we geocoded locations of each reported residential
address and calculated distance to the nearest major roadway (US Census
feature class A1 or A2). To assess exposure patterns over pregnancy and
childhood, we also calculated major roadway proximity at study
enrollment (median 9.9 weeks gestation) and in early childhood (median
3.3 years).

Near-residence traffic density was estimated as the length of all roads
(km) within 100 m of the residence multiplied by traffic counts on those
roads (vehicles/day) [as in (Zeka et al. 2008)], using traffic count
data published by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation through
the Office of Geographic Information (MassGIS, 2014). We used 2002
traffic data in estimates for birth addresses, and 2009 traffic data in
estimates for mid-childhood addresses.

/*Air Pollutant Exposure Assessment*/

We estimated residence-specific BC and PM_{2.5} exposures using
validated spatiotemporal land use regression models. We previously
reported methodologies for these models (Gryparis et al. 2007; Kloog et
al. 2012; Zanobetti et al. 2014). Briefly, the BC model was based on
daily BC measurements from a central monitoring site on the roof the
Harvard Countway Library of Medicine and 148 permanent and temporary BC
monitors operating in the region between January 1999 and August 2011.
Other inputs included area land use, traffic density, and meteorological
data (Gryparis et al. 2007; Zanobetti et al. 2014).

The PM_{2.5} model incorporated satellite aerosol optical depth
measurements at the 10 × 10 km grid scale for years 2000‒2010 from the
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer aboard the Earth Observing
System satellites. Additional inputs to the PM_{2.5} model included
daily PM_{2.5} concentration measurements from United States
Environmental Protection Agency and Interagency Monitoring of Protected
Visual Environments networks, along with data on area and point sources
of PM_{2.5}, land use, locations of major roads, and meteorology (Kloog
et al. 2012).

Using geocoded residential addresses, we estimated mean BC and PM_{2.5}
exposures for the third trimester of pregnancy (188th day after last
menstrual period‒birth), the year prior to each child's cognitive
assessment, and the first six years of life (birth‒age 6). We assigned
exposures only if participants resided in areas where model predictions
were available (Eastern Massachusetts for the BC model, New England for
the PM_{2.5} model) for ≥90% of days in an exposure period.

/*Cognitive Outcomes*/

Trained Project Viva staff administered assessments of cognitive
development at in-person visits when children were 6.6‒10.9 (mean 8.0)
years. We assessed verbal and non-verbal intelligence using the Kaufman
Brief Intelligence Test (KBIT-2) (Kaufman and Kaufman 2004), visual
motor performance with the Visual-Motor subtest of the Wide Range
Assessment of Visual Motor Abilities (WRAVMA) (Adams and Sheslow 1995),
and visual memory (design memory and picture memory) with the Visual
Memory Index of the Wide Range Assessment of Memory and Learning
(WRAML2) (Adams and Sheslow 2003). Assessments were double-scored using
published scoring guidelines and supplementary guidelines developed by a
pediatric neuropsychologist to ensure consistency among scorers (Project
Viva, 2002). Staff administering and scoring assessments had no
knowledge of participants' traffic exposure status. Scaled scores were
standardized to mean=100, standard deviation (SD)=15 for KBIT-2 and
WRAVMA, and mean=10, SD=3 for WRAML2 design memory and picture memory
subscores, based on published reference data (Adams and Sheslow 1995,
2003; Kaufman and Kaufman 2004). Neurobehavioral functional domains
measured by each of the cognitive assessments are outlined in the
Supplemental Material, Table S1.

/*Covariates*/

Covariate data were collected from study questionnaires, interviews, and
children's medical records. We calculated median annual household income
for census tract of residence at the date of cognitive assessment using
data from the 2000 United States Census (United States Census Bureau,
2000). We assessed support for cognitive development in the child's home
using the Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment short form
(HOME-SF). HOME-SF scores range from 0‒22; higher scores represent
better support (Frankenburg and Coons 1986). We assessed mothers' full
scale IQ with the KBIT-2. A subset of mothers (n=571) provided blood
samples in mid-pregnancy, which were analyzed for lead (Perkins et al.
2014). We accessed clinical blood lead levels in early childhood from
medical records for 419 child participants.

/*Statistical Analyses */

We assessed correlations among exposures, outcomes and covariates with
Spearman correlation coefficients, and assessed collinearity among model
covariates by calculating variance inflation factors. We ran separate
multivariate linear regression models to estimate exposure-outcome
associations of each cognitive outcome (verbal IQ, non-verbal IQ, visual
motor, design memory, and picture memory) with each exposure type (major
roadway proximity, traffic density, BC, and PM_{2.5}) for each exposure
window (birth and date of testing for traffic measures, third trimester
of pregnancy, birth‒age 6, and year before testing for BC and PM_{2.5}).
We analyzed major roadway proximity in three categories using cut points
drawn to reflect the exponential-type pattern of spatial decay observed
for some components of traffic-related air pollution: <50 m, 50‒<200 m,
and ≥200 m (Hart et al. 2009; Karner et al. 2010; Zhu et al. 2002). We
natural log (ln)-transformed traffic density and modeled it as a
continuous exposure; BC and PM_{2.5} were also treated as continuous
exposures. We scaled effect estimates by the interquartile range (IQR)
of ln(traffic density), BC, or PM_{2.5} for the relevant period. We
checked our assumption of linearity of the continuous exposure-outcome
relationships by fitting generalized additive models with penalized
spline smooth terms for continuous exposures, adjusted for all relevant
covariates (see below) and visually assessing plotted splines

We ran initial models minimally adjusted for child sex and age at
cognitive testing. Primary models were adjusted for a range of
covariates selected as potential confounders based on prior evidence,
according to Directed Acyclic Graph theory (Hernán et al. 2002).
Covariates for primary models included characteristics of the child
(sex, age at cognitive testing, breastfeeding duration (months up to
12), blood lead in early childhood (µg/dL)), mother (IQ, parity (0, 1,
≥2), age at enrollment (<25, 25-34, ≥35 years), marital/cohabitation
status (yes/no), education (≥college graduate/<college graduate),
race/ethnicity (Black, White, Hispanic, Asian, Other), smoking status
(never, former, smoked during pregnancy), exposure to secondhand smoke
during pregnancy (<1 hour/≥1 hour per week), blood lead in pregnancy
(µg/dL), alcohol consumption during pregnancy (g/day)), father
(education (≥college graduate/<college graduate)), household (ownership
of a gas stove (yes/no), annual income at time of cognitive assessment
(<$40K, $40-70K, $70-150K, ≥$150K), HOME-SF score), and neighborhood
(median annual income for census tract of residence at cognitive
testing). Models for third trimester BC and PM_{2.5} exposures were also
adjusted for seasonal trends (modeled as sine and cosine functions of
the date of cognitive testing) (Schwartz et al. 1991).

We hypothesized that gestational age and fetal growth could be on the
causal pathway between pregnancy exposures and cognitive development, so
we did not adjust for these covariates in primary models, but ran
sensitivity analyses adjusted for gestational age (in weeks) and birth
weight/gestational age z-score (Oken et al. 2003). We investigated the
influence of individual covariates on the associations between BC
exposure and verbal IQ by running a series of models adjusted for
subsets of covariates.

To increase sample size (precision) and reduce bias due to missing data,
we imputed missing covariates. Using a chained equation multiple
imputation method (PROC MI in SAS), we generated 50 imputed data sets
including all Project Viva participants with live births (n=2,128)
(Rubin 2004; White et al. 2011). The imputation model included all
exposures, outcomes, and covariates under study, as well as additional
potential predictors (White et al. 2011). In final analytic models, we
combined imputed data sets using PROC MIANALYZE. Participants with
missing exposure or outcome data for a given exposure-outcome analysis
were excluded from that analysis

As a sensitivity analysis, we re-ran primary models excluding
participants (n=21) who did not complete the full set of cognitive
assessments. To assess the influence of maternal IQ and maternal and
child blood lead as potential confounders, we ran primary models with
and without these covariates. In addition, we assessed effect measure
modification of associations with near-residence traffic density, BC,
and PM_{2.5} by child sex and annual household income at assessment
(</≥$70K) using interaction terms. Numbers of participants in the <50 m
category of major roadway proximity were not sufficient to assess effect
modification with this exposure.

We performed analyses involving penalized splines in R Version 3.0.0 (R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria); all other
analyses were completed using SAS Version 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc, Cary,
NC).

*RESULTS*

/*Participant Characteristics*/

We included 1,109 children with data on at least one exposure and one
outcome. Characteristics of included participants were generally similar
to participants excluded due to missing exposure or outcome data,
although excluded participants had somewhat lower birth weight (3,433
versus 3,486 g), shorter duration of breastfeeding (4.5 versus 6.5
months), higher rates of maternal smoking in pregnancy (16 versus 10%)
and slightly lower levels of parental education and household income
(see Supplemental Material, Table S2). Distributions of covariates in
the original and the imputed data sets were very similar (see
Supplemental Material, Table S2). Table 1 presents distributions of
participant characteristics and cognitive assessment scores. Cognitive
assessment scores were generally lower among participants living closest
(<50 m) to a major roadway at birth (n=34).

/*Exposures*/

Table 2 describes the distribution of exposures. 34 participants (3%)
lived within 50 m of a major roadway at birth (of these, 23 resided in
urban areas, with 11 in suburban or rural areas). Spearman correlation
coefficients among exposure variables are presented in the Supplemental
Material (Table S3); as expected, distance to major roadway was
negatively correlated with traffic density, BC, and PM_{2.5} exposures,
with residences further from major roadways having lower local traffic
density and lower pollutant concentrations. Third trimester BC exposures
were higher for non-White mothers, nulliparous mothers, and for mothers
who were not married or cohabiting, had lower education, lower household
income, higher exposure to secondhand smoke, or who lived in households
with gas stoves (see Supplemental Material, Table S4).

Ninety-seven percent of participants remained in the same category of
roadway proximity from enrollment through the child's birth, while 91%
remained from birth‒age 3, and 88% remained from birth‒cognitive
testing. Participants in the closest road proximity category (<50 m)
were more likely to move to a different category between birth and
cognitive testing (61% in this group changed categories, versus 56% from
the 50‒<200 m group, and 6% for the ≥200 m group).

/*Major Roadway Proximity*/

In fully adjusted regression models, children with birth addresses
within 50 m of a major roadway had lower mid-childhood non-verbal IQ
scores (-7.5 points; 95% confidence interval (CI): -13.1, -1.9), verbal
IQ scores (-3.8 points; 95% CI: -8.2, 0.6) and visual motor scores (-5.3
points; 95% CI: -11.0, 0.4) than participants living ≥200 m from a major
roadway (Figure 1a). Design memory and picture memory scores did not
differ substantially by major roadway proximity (Figure 1b). Estimated
associations were similar in minimally adjusted models (see Supplemental
Material, Table S5). Non-verbal IQ scores were also lower among children
living <50 m versus ≥200 m from a major roadway at the time of cognitive
testing (-5.6 points; 95% CI: -11.9, 0.8), but living 50‒<200 m versus
≥200 m at cognitive testing predicted higher non-verbal IQ (3.2 points;
95% CI: -0.4, 6.8)Other cognitive scores did not appear to differ across
levels of mid-childhood major roadway proximity (see Supplemental
Material, Table S6).

/*Near-Residence Traffic Density*/

Children with higher near-residence traffic density at birth had
slightly higher non-verbal IQ, visual motor, design memory and picture
memory scores(Table 3). Traffic density at cognitive testing predicted
lower verbal IQ in minimally adjusted models (-1.3 points per IQR
increase, 95% CI: -2.5, -0.1) (see Supplemental Material, Table S5), but
fully adjusted models suggested associations with higher verbal IQ (1.1
points per IQR increase, 95% CI: 0.0, 2.2) and non-verbal IQ (see
Supplemental Material, Table S6). Traffic density at mid-childhood
address did not appear associated with other cognitive outcomes.

/*Black Carbon (BC)*/

Third trimester BC exposure predicted lower verbal IQ in minimally
adjusted models (-1.9 points per IQR increase, 95% CI:-3.2, -0.7) (see
Supplemental Material, Table S5). Fully adjusted results, however,
showed no association between third trimester BC exposure and verbal IQ
(Table 3). Similarly, in minimally adjusted models, BC exposure in the
year before cognitive testing was associated with lower verbal IQ (-2.4
points per IQR increase, 95% CI: -3.6, -1.1), as was birth‒age 6 BC
exposure (-2.6 points per IQR increase, 95% CI: -3.9, -1.4), but after
full adjustment, each predicted slightly higher verbal IQ (year prior to
cognitive testing:1.1 points per IQR increase, 95% CI: -0.2, 2.4;
birth‒age 6: 0.9, 95% CI: -0.4, 2.2)(see Supplemental Material, Tables
S5 and S6). The attenuation or reversal of direction in these
associations appeared to be driven by adjustment for sociodemographic
variables, specifically maternal race/ethnicity and census tract median
income (see Supplemental Material, Figure S1).

Third trimester BC and birth‒age 6 BC were also associated with higher
non-verbal IQ in fully adjusted models (third trimester: 1.3 points per
IQR increase, 95% CI: -0.2, 2.7; birth‒age 6: 1.7, 95% CI: 0.1, 3.4)
(see Table 3 and Supplemental Material, Table S6). Neither third
trimester, birth‒age 6, nor year before testing BC appeared associated
with other cognitive outcomes.

/*Fine Particulate Matter (PM_{2.5})*/

In fully adjusted models,there was no evidence of adverse association
between third trimester PM_{2.5} and cognitive outcomes; an IQR increase
in third trimester PM_{2.5} predicted slightly higher non-verbal IQ (0.9
points, 95% CI: -0.8, 2.5)(Table 3). In minimally adjusted models, an
IQR increase in birth‒age 6 or year before testing PM_{2.5} predicted
lower verbal IQ (birth‒age 6: -1.9 points, 95% CI: -3.0, -0.8; year
before testing: -1.0 points, 95% CI: -2.2, 0.2) (see Supplemental
Material, Table S5), but predicted slightly higher verbal IQ in fully
adjusted models (birth‒age 6: 0.7 points, 95% CI: -0.4, 1.7; year before
testing: 1.1 points, 95% CI: 0.0, 2.2) (see Supplemental Material, Table
S6). Birth‒age 6 PM_{2.5} was also associated with small increases in
non-verbal IQ (1.1 points per IQR increase, 95% CI: -0.2, 2.5) and
visual motor skills (1.8 points per IQR increase, 95% CI: 0.4, 3.2) in
fully adjusted models (see Supplemental Material, Table S6).

/*Sensitivity Analyses*/

Variance inflation factors were <2 for all covariates included in
primary models, suggesting that collinearity among covariates did not
reduce precision of effect estimates. Visual inspection suggested that
penalized splines for the continuous exposure-outcome relationships
generally did not deviate substantially from linearity (data not shown).
For all exposures, periods, and outcomes, results generated by models
additionally adjusted for birth outcomes (considered as potential
mediators), were similar to those from primary models (see Supplemental
Material, Table S7). Analyses excluding participants with incomplete
cognitive assessments (n=21) also yielded similar results (data not
shown). Results of models excluding maternal IQ and maternal and child
blood lead were very similar to those of primary models (data not
shown). We did not observe consistent patterns of effect measure
modification by sex or household income (data not shown).

*DISCUSSION*

Among children residing primarily in urban and suburban Eastern
Massachusetts, prenatal residential proximity to major roadways (<50 m)
predicted lower non-verbal intelligence, verbal intelligence, and visual
motor abilities in mid-childhood. These findings are based on
observations from a small number of children (n=34) living <50 m from a
major roadway at birth, and should therefore be interpreted cautiously,
but suggest that major roadway proximity during gestation may be
associated with decrements in function across a range of cognitive
domains. The 7.5 point (95% CI: -13.1, -1.9) decrement in non-verbal IQ
associated with residence at birth <50 m compared to ≥200 m of a major
roadway is similar in scale to the decrement in full-scale IQ associated
with an increase in childhood blood lead from 2.4 to 30 µg/dL (the
5^{th} to the 95^{th} percentile) in an international pooled analysis
(6.9 points) (Lanphear et al. 2005).

Two of the cognitive outcomes related to prenatal major roadway
proximity in our study (verbal and non-verbal intelligence) were
inversely associated with exposure to PAHs measured in late pregnancy
among 5-year-olds in New York City and Poland (Edwards et al. 2010;
Perera et al. 2009). While we know of no previous reports of
associations of early-life residential roadway proximity with cognitive
outcomes in children, prenatal proximity to freeways was associated in
another study with development of autism in childhood (Volk et al.
2011).

Living < 50 m from a major roadway at the time of cognitive testing
predicted a smaller decrease in non-verbal IQ than roadway proximity at
birth, and did not appear associated with other cognitive outcomes.
These findings suggest that major roadway proximity during gestation and
early life might have a greater influence on cognitive development than
major roadway proximity later in childhood, but associations at both
time periods were very imprecise due to small numbers of participants in
the closest proximity group.

The associations we observed between major roadway proximity and child
cognition may be attributable to tailpipe emissions, but may also
involve other roadway-related exposures such as road dust or noise, or
associated neighborhood characteristics like walkability and access to
green space. Findings may also reflect random error or bias,
particularly given the small numbers of observations in the closest
proximity group, and require replication in other populations Air
pollution exposure could impair neurodevelopment through several
pathways, including endocrine disruption, epigenetic changes, or
systemic inflammatory responses leading to oxidative stress
(Calderón-Garcidueñas et al. 2011; Edwards et al. 2010; Perera et al.
2006; Volk et al. 2011). There is also evidence that chronic exposure to
noise may be associated with decreased cognitive function in children
(Stansfeld et al. 2005).

Although we observed evidence of associations of prenatal, birth‒age 6,
and proximal exposure to BC with verbal IQ in minimally adjusted models,
associations were attenuated or reversed following adjustment for
covariates (in particular, maternal race and census tract median
income), suggesting that spatial relationships in this study population
between traffic-related pollution exposures and sociodemographic factors
strongly related to cognitive outcomes may limit our ability to
determine if there are independent effects of these pollution measures
on these outcomes; prenatal and childhood exposure to BC also tended to
predict somewhat higher non-verbal IQ in fully adjusted models. The
correlation observed between pollution estimates and sociodemographic
variables is likely due to complex geographical covariation, partly
arising from clustering of sociodemographic characteristics and
pollution in communities. We have not been able to adequately define
this clustering; doing so would likely require new statistical
methodology and additional variables and observations. We are therefore
unable to completely disentangle the influences of pollutants and
socioeconomic conditions on cognition. Conversely, however, we did not
observe evidence of substantial confounding in the models of prenatal
major roadway proximity by any of the measured covariates, suggesting
that residual confounding by sociodemographic factors is unlikely to
explain the observed major roadway proximity-cognition associations.

Our results are not consistent with a prior report from another Boston
cohort of lower verbal IQ, non-verbal IQ, and visual memory scores among
children with higher childhood exposure to BC (Suglia et al. 2008).
Exposure levels in our study were similar to those in the other cohort,
but the inconsistency in findings may stem from differences in
population demographics between the studied cohorts, or differences in
analytical approaches.

Limitations in the spatial resolution of one important input to the
PM_{2.5} model, the satellite aerosol optical depth data, may have
constrained our ability to detect associations between PM_{2.5} exposure
and cognition; advances in remote sensing technology should increase
precision of estimates in the future. It is also possible that exposure
to particular components of PM_{2.5} might have an influence on
cognition that we were unable to measure when estimating associations
with PM_{2.5} total mass.

Our observation of associations of lower cognitive scores with major
roadway proximity but not with traffic density may stem from imprecision
in our estimates of traffic density or uncaptured variability in the
traffic pollution sources represented. In addition, in contrast to our
roadway proximity exposure, which included the category <50 m, our
traffic density estimates included all traffic within 100 m of a
residence, and important constituents of traffic-related pollution, such
as ultrafine particles, may be concentrated nearer to roadways than 100
m (Karner et al. 2010; Zhu et al. 2002).

Because numerous studies have demonstrated modest decrements in birth
weight and gestation length with greater air pollution exposure (Stieb
et al. 2012) and lower fetal growth and shorter gestation length are
inversely associated with cognitive development (Shenkin et al 2004;
Yang et al. 2010), we hypothesized that preterm birth or intrauterine
growth restriction might lie on the causal pathway between prenatal
traffic exposure and cognition. However, the associations we observed
between major roadway proximity at birth and cognitive outcomes in
primary models did not change appreciably in sensitivity analyses
adjusted for gestational age and birth weight for gestational age
z-score, suggesting that relationships between major roadway proximity
and cognitive development were not mediated by these factors.

While we examined multiple exposures and outcomes, these measures were
correlated, and we drew conclusions from patterns across results rather
than individual significant associations, so the issue of multiple
comparisons is not of serious concern. Additional limitations in our
study should be noted, however. To capture the potential effects of
exposure to air pollutants that exist in high concentrations only very
near to major roadways, we delineated our closest category of major
roadway proximity at <50 m. Because a relatively small number of
participants resided in this category, our effect estimates for this
group had limited precision. Although we worked to minimize error in
geocoding, exposure misclassification due to positional error and
time-activity patterns of participants is still possible (Lane et al.
2013). Because most participants remained in the same category of major
roadway proximity throughout the study period, it is also possible that
prenatal distance to roadway may represent cumulative exposure before
and after pregnancy.

Due to early loss to follow-up in Project Viva, which is typical of
longitudinal birth cohort studies, our study included only 52% of the
original cohort. While it is reassuring that early life exposures and
other characteristics of included participants were generally similar to
those of the excluded participants, there were small differences in some
factors correlated with both exposures and outcomes, suggesting that
selection bias is possible. Finally, although our study population was
reasonably diverse in terms of race/ethnicity and income, study
participants all had health insurance coverage and access to early
prenatal care, and were on average relatively well off and highly
educated, meaning that generalizability of results to less advantaged
populations may be limited.

To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess relationships
between neurodevelopment and exposure to traffic-related pollution
across periods in gestation and childhood in an effort to identify
particularly vulnerable developmental windows. We included multiple
cognitive tests representing several domains of brain function. Our
analyses were strengthened by the capacity to examine the influence of
potential confounders including maternal IQ, maternal and child blood
lead, smoking and secondhand smoke exposure, and multiple measures
related to household and area-level socioeconomic status.

*CONCLUSION*

Our findings suggest that prenatal proximity to major roadways may
negatively influence performance across a range of cognitive domains in
mid-childhood. Proximity of children's homes to major roadways at the
time of cognitive testing appeared less strongly predictive of cognitive
performance, suggesting that gestation (or early life) could be a more
sensitive period than mid-childhood to the effects of major roadway
proximity on cognitive development. Because only a small number of study
participants lived very close to major roadways, however, estimated
associations with roadway proximity were imprecise; our findings should
therefore be considered preliminary and require replication in other
populations. Prenatal and childhood near-residence traffic density, BC,
and PM_{2.5} did not display consistent patterns of association with
child cognition.

*REFERENCES *

Adams W, Sheslow D. 1995. Wide Range Assessment of Visual Motor
Abilities (WRAVMA). Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.

Adams W, Sheslow D. 2003. Wide Range Assessment of Memory and Learning
Second Edition (WRAML2) Administration and Technical Manual. Lutz, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.

Bellinger DC. 2013. Prenatal exposures to environmental chemicals and
children's neurodevelopment: An update. Saf Health Work 4:1‒11.

Block ML, Elder A, Auten RL, Bilbo SD, Chen H, Chen JC, et al. 2012. The
outdoor air

pollution and brain health workshop. Neurotoxicology 33:972‒984.

Calderón-Garcidueñas L, Engle R, Mora-Tiscareño A, Styner M, Gómez-Garza
G, Zhu H, et al. 2011. Exposure to severe urban air pollution influences
cognitive outcomes, brain volume and systemic inflammation in clinically
healthy children. Brain Cogn 77:345‒355.

Edwards SC, Jedrychowski W, Butscher M, Camann D, Kieltyka A, Mroz E, et
al. 2010. Prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
and children's intelligence at 5 years of age in a prospective cohort
study in Poland. Environ Health Perspect 118:1326‒1331.

Frankenburg WK, Coons CE. 1986. Home screening questionnaire: Its
validity in assessing home environment. J Pediatr 108:624‒626.

Freire C, Ramos R, Puertas R, Lopez-Espinosa MJ, Julvez J, Aguilera I,
et al. 2010. Association of traffic-related air pollution with cognitive
development in children. J Epidemiol Community Health 64:223‒228.

Guxens M, Garcia-Esteban R, Giorgis-Allemand L, Forns J, Badaloni C,
Ballester F, et al. 2014. Air pollution during pregnancy and childhood
cognitive and psychomotor development: six European birth cohorts.
Epidemiology 25:636‒47.

Gryparis AC, Coull BA, Schwartz J, Suh HH. 2007. Semiparametric latent
variable regression models for spatio-temporal modeling of mobile source
particles in the greater Boston area. J R Stat Soc Ser C Appl Stat
56:183‒209.

Hart JE, Laden F, Puett RC, Costenbader KH, Karlson EW. 2009. Exposure
to traffic pollution and increased risk of rheumatoid arthritis. Environ
Health Perspect 117:1065-1069.

Hernán MA, Hernández-Diaz S, Werler MM, Mitchell AA. 2002. Causal
knowledge as a prerequisite for confounding evaluation: an application
to birth defects epidemiology. Am J Epidemiol 155:176‒184.

Karner AA, Eisinger DS, Niemeier DA. 2010. Near-roadway air quality:
synthesizing the findings from real-world data. Environ SciTechnol
44:5334‒5344.

Kaufman AS, Kaufman NL. 2004. Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test Second
Edition (KBIT-2). Bloomington, MN: Pearson, Inc.

Kloog I, Nordio F, Coull BA, Schwartz J. 2012. Incorporating local land
use regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model of
spatiotemporal PM(2.5) exposures in the Mid-Atlantic states. Environ Sci
Technol 46:11913‒11921.

Lane KJ, Kangsen Scammell M, Levy JI, Fuller CH, Parambi R, Zamore W, et
al. 2013. Positional error and time-activity patterns in near-highway
proximity studies: an exposure misclassification analysis. Environ
Health 12:75; doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-12-75.

Lanphear BP, Hornung R, Khoury J, Yolton K, Baghurst P, Bellinger DC, et
al. 2005. Low-level environmental lead exposure and children's
intellectual function: an international pooled analysis. Environ Health
Perspect. 113:894‒9.

Massachusetts Office of Geographic Information (MassGIS). 2014. MassGIS
Data - Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) Roads.
Available:
http://www.mass.gov/anf/research-and-tech/it-serv-and-support/application-serv/office-of-geographic-information-massgis/datalayers/eotroads.html
[Accessed 13 March 2015].

Oken E, Baccarelli AA, Gold DR, Kleinman KP, Litonjua AA, De Meo D, et
al. 2014. Cohort Profile:  Project Viva. Int J Epidemiol; doi:
10.1093/ije/dyu008 [Online 16 March 2014].

Oken E, Kleinman KP, Rich-Edwards J, Gillman MW. 2003. A nearly
continuous measure of birth weight for gestational age using a united
states national reference. BMC Pediatr 3:6.

Perera FP, Rauh V, Whyatt RM, Tsai WY, Tang D, Diaz D, et al. 2006.
Effect of prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
on neurodevelopment in the first 3 years of life among inner-city
children. Environ Health Perspect 114:1287‒1292.

Perera FP, Li Z, Whyatt R, Hoepner L, Wang S, Camann D, et al. 2009.
Prenatal airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon exposure and child IQ
at age 5 years. Pediatrics 124:e195-202.

Perkins M, Wright RO, Amarasiriwardena CJ, Jayawardene I, Rifas-Shiman
SL, Oken E. 2014. Very low maternal lead level in pregnancy and birth
outcomes in an Eastern Massachusetts population. Annals of Epidemiology
24: 915-919.

Project Viva. 2002. Measuring WRAVMA Drawing Designs with Scoring
Templates - Revision 7/2/02. Available:
https://www.hms.harvard.edu/viva/protocol-wravma-drawing-scoring.pdf
[Accessed 13 March 2015].

Rubin DB. 2004. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. Hoboken,
N.J.: Wiley-Interscience.

Schwartz J, Spix C, Wichmann HE, Malin E. 1991. Air pollution and acute
respiratory illness in five German communities. Environ Res 56:1‒14.

Shenkin SD, Starr JM, Deary IJ. 2004. Birth weight and cognitive ability
in childhood: a systematic review. Psychol Bull 130:989‒1013.

Stansfeld SA, Berglund B, Clark C, Lopez-Barrio I, Fischer P, Ohrström
E, et al. 2005. Aircraft and road traffic noise and children's cognition
and health: a cross-national study. Lancet 365:1942‒1949.

Stieb DM, Chen L, Eshoul M, Judek S. 2012. Ambient air pollution, birth
weight and preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ
Res 117:100‒111.

Suglia SF, Gryparis A, Wright RO, Schwartz J, Wright RJ. 2008.
Association of black carbon with cognition among children in a
prospective birth cohort study. Am J Epidemiol 167:280‒286.

United States Census Bureau. 2000. US Census 2000: Summary File 3.
Available: http://www.census.gov/census2000/sumfile3.html [Accessed 18
September 2013].

Volk HE, Hertz-Picciotto I, Delwiche L, Lurmann F, McConnell R. 2011.
Residential proximity to freeways and autism in the CHARGE study.
Environ Health Perspect 119:873‒877.

Wang S, Zhang J, Zeng X, Zeng Y, Wang S, Chen S. 2009. Association of
traffic-related air pollution with children's neurobehavioral functions
in Quanzhou, China. Environ Health Perspect 117:1612‒1618.

White IR, Royston P, Wood AM. 2011. Multiple imputation using chained
equations: issues and guidance for practice. Stat Med 30:377‒399.

Yang S, Platt RW, Kramer MS. 2010. Variation in child cognitive ability
by week of gestation among healthy term births. Am J Epidemiol
171:399‒406.

Zanobetti A, Coull BA, Gryparis A, Kloog I, Sparrow D, Vokonas PS, et
al. 2014. Associations between arrhythmia episodes and temporally and
spatially resolved black carbon and particulate matter in elderly
patients. Occup Environ Med 71:201‒207.

Zeka A, Melly SJ, Schwartz J. 2008. The effects of socioeconomic status
and indices of physical environment on reduced birth weight and preterm
births in Eastern Massachusetts. Environ Health 7: 60; doi:
10.1186/1476-069X-7-60.

Zhu Y, Hinds WC, Kim S, Sioutas C. 2002. Concentration and size
distribution of ultrafine particles near a major highway. J Air Waste
Manag Assoc 52:1032‒10.

*TABLES*

*Table 1.* Characteristics of study participants [n (%) or mean ± SD,
after imputation for covariates], overall and by category of major
roadway proximity at birth address

| *Characteristic*                                                                |    | *Overall*         | *≥200 m from a major roadway*(n=970)   | *50‒<200 m*                      | *<50 m from a major roadway* (n=34)   |
|                                                                                 |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
|                                                                                 |    | (n=1,109)         |                                        | *from a major roadway* (n=100)   |                                       |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+-------------------+----------------------------------------+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------|
| *Cognitive Assessments*                                                         |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| Verbal IQ (KBIT-2) (n=1,099)                                                    |    | 111.8 ± 15.1      | 111.9 ± 15.3                           | 112.4 ± 14.0                     | 107.8 ± 14.1                          |
| Non-Verbal IQ (KBIT-2) (n=1,109)                                                |    | 106.3 ± 17.0      | 106.4 ± 16.8                           | 108.4 ± 16.7                     | 98.6 ± 20.5                           |
| Visual Motor (WRAVMA) (n=1,102)                                                 |    | 92.0 ± 16.7       | 92.3 ± 16.9                            | 90.7 ± 15.2                      | 87.9 ± 16.9                           |
| Design Memory (WRAML2) (n=1,105)                                                |    | 8.0 ± 2.8         | 8.0 ± 2.8                              | 8.1 ± 2.6                        | 8.0 ± 2.8                             |
| Picture Memory (WRAML2) (n=1,105)                                               |    | 8.9 ± 3.0         | 8.9 ± 3.0                              | 8.6 ± 2.9                        | 8.7 ± 3.2                             |
| *Child characteristics*                                                         |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| Age at testing (years)                                                          |    | 8.0 ± 0.8         | 8.0 ± 0.9                              | 7.9 ± 0.8                        | 7.9 ± 0.9                             |
| /Sex/                                                                           |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| Female (%)                                                                      |    | 555 (50)          | 477 (49)                               | 58 (58)                          | 17 (50)                               |
| Male (%)                                                                        |    | 554 (50)          | 493 (51)                               | 42 (42)                          | 17 (50)                               |
| Gestational age (weeks)                                                         |    | 39.5 ± 1.8        | 39.6 ± 1.8                             | 39.5 ± 1.7                       | 39.1 ± 2.4                            |
| Birth weight (grams)                                                            |    | 3,486 ± 560       | 3,493 ± 559                            | 3,526 ± 506                      | 3,206 ± 679                           |
| Birth weight/gestational age z-score                                            |    | 0.19 ± 0.97       | 0.20 ± 0.98                            | 0.33 ± 0.89                      | -0.27 ± 1.02                          |
| Duration of breastfeeding (months up to 12)                                     |    | 6.3 ± 4.8         | 6.3 ± 4.8                              | 6.5 ± 4.7                        | 5.5 ± 4.2                             |
| Early childhood blood lead (µg/dL)                                              |    | 2.3 ± 2.1         | 2.3 ± 2.0                              | 2.3 ± 1.7                        | 2.7 ± 2.6                             |
| *Maternal characteristics*                                                      |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| Age at enrollment (years)                                                       |    | 32.1 ± 5.4        | 32.2 ± 5.3                             | 31.2 ± 5.7                       | 30.5 ± 5.7                            |
| IQ (KBIT-2 composite)                                                           |    | 106.3 ± 15.5      | 106.4 ± 15.4                           | 106.5 ± 16.6                     | 103.7 ± 14.1                          |
| /Parity /                                                                       |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| Nulliparous (%)                                                                 |    | 528 (48)          | 465 (48)                               | 42 (42)                          | 17 (50)                               |
| 1 (%)                                                                           |    | 400 (36)          | 341 (35)                               | 43 (43)                          | 15 (44)                               |
| ≥2 (%)                                                                          |    | 181 (16)          | 164 (17)                               | 15 (15)                          | 2 (6)                                 |
| /Education /                                                                    |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| College degree or beyond (%)                                                    |    | 752 (68)          | 651 (67)                               | 73 (73)                          | 24 (71)                               |
| Less than college degree (%)                                                    |    | 357 (32)          | 319 (33)                               | 27 (27)                          | 10 (29)                               |
| /Race/ethnicity/                                                                |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| White (%)                                                                       |    | 747 (67)          | 665 (69)                               | 62 (62)                          | 17 (50)                               |
| Black (%)                                                                       |    | 181 (16)          | 149 (15)                               | 23 (23)                          | 9 (26)                                |
| Asian (%)                                                                       |    | 59 (5)            | 50 (5)                                 | 5 (5)                            | 4 (12)                                |
| Hispanic (%)                                                                    |    | 72 (6)            | 62 (6)                                 | 7 (7)                            | 2 (6)                                 |
| Other (%)                                                                       |    | 50 (5)            | 44 (5)                                 | 3 (3)                            | 2 (6)                                 |
| Alcohol consumption during pregnancy (g/day)                                    |    | 0.18 ± 0.25       | 0.18 ± 0.25                            | 0.20 ± 0.29                      | 0.15 ± 0.24                           |
| /Smoking status/                                                                |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| Smoked during pregnancy (%)                                                     |    | 109 (10)          | 94 (10)                                | 12 (12)                          | 3 (9)                                 |
| Former smoker (%)                                                               |    | 214 (19)          | 191 (20)                               | 16 (16)                          | 7 (21)                                |
| Never smoker (%)                                                                |    | 786 (71)          | 685 (71)                               | 72 (72)                          | 24 (71)                               |
| /Exposure to secondhand smoke during pregnancy/                                 |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| ≥1 hour per week (%)                                                            |    | 189 (17)          | 160 (17)                               | 22 (22)                          | 5 (15)                                |
| <1 hour per week (%)                                                            |    | 920 (83)          | 810 (84)                               | 78 (78)                          | 29 (85)                               |
| /Marital/cohabitation status/                                                   |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| Married or cohabitating (%)                                                     |    | 1,011 (91)        | 887 (91)                               | 88 (88)                          | 32 (94)                               |
| Not married or cohabitating (%)                                                 |    | 98 (9)            | 83 (9)                                 | 12 (12)                          | 2 (6)                                 |
| Blood lead in pregnancy (µg/dL)                                                 |    | 1.2 ± 0.8         | 1.2 ± 0.8                              | 1.3 ± 0.9                        | 1.5 ± 1.0                             |
| *Paternal characteristics*                                                      |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| /Education/                                                                     |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| College degree or beyond (%)                                                    |    | 699 (63)          | 609 (63)                               | 63 (63)                          | 24 (72)                               |
| Less than college degree (%)                                                    |    | 411 (37)          | 361 (37)                               | 38 (38)                          | 10 (29)                               |
| *Household/neighborhood characteristics*                                        |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| /Household income at mid-childhood/                                             |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| ≤$40K (%)                                                                       |    | 141 (13)          | 115 (12)                               | 19 (19)                          | 5 (16)                                |
| $>40‒≤70K (%)                                                                   |    | 153 (14)          | 137 (14)                               | 11 (11)                          | 4 (13)                                |
| $>70‒≤150K (%)                                                                  |    | 502 (45)          | 454 (47)                               | 34 (34)                          | 13 (37)                               |
| >$150 K (%)                                                                     |    | 313 (28)          | 264 (27)                               | 35 (35)                          | 12 (34)                               |
| HOME-SF score                                                                   |    | 18.4 ± 2.2        | 18.3 ± 2.3                             | 18.3 ± 2.1                       | 18.8 ± 1.9                            |
| /Gas stove in home at age 1/                                                    |    |                   |                                        |                                  |                                       |
| Yes (%)                                                                         |    | 652 (59)          | 570 (59)                               | 59 (59)                          | 20 (60)                               |
| No (%)                                                                          |    | 457 (41)          | 400 (41)                               | 41 (41)                          | 14 (41)                               |
| Census tract median annual household income, address at cognitive testing ($)   |    | 64,800 ± 24,733   | 64,743 ± 23,869                        | 63,810 ± 28,889                  | 73,046 ± 34,727                       |

SD, standard deviation.

*\\
*

*Table 2.* Traffic-related pollution exposures

| * Exposure*                                           | *N*    | *Mean ± SD or N (%)*   |
|-------------------------------------------------------+--------+------------------------|
| *Proximity to major roadway, birth address*           | 1104   |                        |
| <50 m                                                 |        | 34 (3%)                |
| 50‒<200 m                                             |        | 100 (9%)               |
| ≥200 m                                                |        | 970 (88%)              |
| *Proximity to major roadway, mid-childhood address*   | 1102   |                        |
| <50 m                                                 |        | 26 (2%)                |
| 50‒<200 m                                             |        | 88 (8%)                |
| ≥200 m                                                |        | 988 (90%)              |
| *Near-residence traffic density*                      |        |                        |
| Birth address (km*vehicles/day)                       | 1101   | 1,428 ± 1,850          |
| Mid-childhood address (km*vehicles/day)               | 993    | 1,140 ± 1,620          |
| *Black carbon (BC) exposure *                         |        |                        |
| Third trimester (µg/m^{3})                            | 1095   | 0.69 ± 0.23            |
| Birth‒age 6 (µg/m^{3})                                | 945    | 0.56 ± 0.16            |
| Year before cognitive testing (µg/m^{3})              | 965    | 0.47 ± 0.15            |
| *Fine particulate (PM_{2.5}) exposure *               |        |                        |
| Third trimester (µg/m^{3})                            | 960    | 12.3 ± 2.6             |
| Birth‒age 6 (µg/m^{3})                                | 975    | 11.3 ± 1.7             |
| Year before cognitive testing (µg/m^{3})              | 1036   | 9.4 ± 1.9              |

SD, standard deviation.

*Table 3.* Mean differences in cognitive assessment scores associated
with IQR increases in prenatal near-residence traffic density, black
carbon, and fine particulate matter exposure (95% confidence
intervals)^{a}

| *Exposure*                                            | *Verbal IQ*        | *Non-Verbal IQ*    | *Visual Motor*    | *Design Memory*    | *Picture Memory*   |
|                                                       |                    |                    |                   |                    |                    |
|                                                       | *(KBIT-2*)^{b}     | *(KBIT-2)*^{b}     | *(WRAVMA)*^{b}    | *(WRAML2)*^{c}     | *(WRAML2)*^{c}     |
|-------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------------------|
| Ln(Near-residence traffic density at birth address)   | 0.2 (-0.3, 0.8)    | 0.8 (0.1, 1.6)     | 0.7 (-0.1, 1.5)   | 0.1 (0.0, 0.2)     | 0.1 (0.0, 0.2)     |
| Third trimester BC                                    | 0.2 (-0.9, 1.3)    | 1.3 (-0.2, 2.7)    | 0.9 (-0.6, 2.4)   | -0.1 (-0.3, 0.2)   | -0.1 (-0.3, 0.2)   |
| Third trimester PM_{2.5}                              | -0.2 (-1.4, 1.1)   | -0.2 (-1.8, 1.4)   | 0.9 (-0.8, 2.5)   | -0.1 (-0.3, 0.2)   | 0.1 (-0.2, 0.4)    |

IQR, interquartile range; BC, black carbon; PM_{2.5}, fine particulate
matter. IQR=1.6 ln(km*vehicles/day) for traffic density at birth, 0.32
µg/m^{3} for third trimester BC, 3.8 µg/m^{3} for third trimester
PM_{2.5}.

^{a} All models adjusted for characteristics of child (age, sex,
breastfeeding duration, early childhood blood lead), mother (age,
parity, race/ethnicity, education, IQ, marital/cohabitation status, and
blood lead, smoking, secondhand smoke exposure, and alcohol in
pregnancy), father (education), household (income, home caretaking
environment, gas stove) and neighborhood (census tract median income).
BC and PM_{2.5} models also adjusted for seasonal trends.

^{b} KBIT-2 and WRAVMA scores standardized to mean=100, standard
deviation=15.

^{c} WRAML2 scores standardized to mean=10, standard deviation=3.

*FIGURE LEGENDS*

*Figure 1.* Mean differences in cognitive assessment scores associated
with residential proximity to major roadway at birth (+ 95% confidence
intervals).

Figure 1a displays results for standardized cognitive assessment scores
scaled to mean=100, standard deviation=15 (KBIT-2 verbal and non-verbal
IQ; WRAVMA visual motor). Figure 1b displays results for standardized
cognitive assessment scores scaled to mean=10, standard deviation=3
(WRAML2 design memory and picture memory). All models adjusted for
characteristics of child (age, sex, breastfeeding duration, early
childhood blood lead), mother (age, parity, race/ethnicity, education,
IQ, marital/cohabitation status, and blood lead, smoking, secondhand
smoke exposure, and alcohol in pregnancy), father (education), household
(income, home caretaking environment, gas stove) and neighborhood
(census tract median income).
