*/Using high resolution satellite aerosol optical depth to estimate /*

*/daily PM_{2.5} geographical distribution in Mexico City/*

*Allan C. Just^{1}, Robert O. Wright^{2}, Joel Schwartz^{1}, Brent
Coull^{3}, Andrea Baccarelli^{1}, Martha María Tellez-Rojo^{4}, Emily
Moody^{5}, Yujie Wang^{6,7}, Alexei Lyapustin^{6}, Itai Kloog^{8}*

^{1} Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA

^{2} Department of Preventive Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mt
Sinai, New York, NY, USA

^{3} Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA

^{4} National Institute of Public Health, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico

^{5} Department of Internal Medicine-Pediatrics, University of Minnesota
Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN, USA

^{6} GEST / UMBC, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Baltimore, MD, USA

^{7} University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, USA

^{8} Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Israel

Address correspondence to: Dr. Allan Just, Department of Environmental
Health - Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Drive West, Boston MA
USA 02215; [[mailto:acjust@hsph.harvard.edu][acjust@hsph.harvard.edu]]

*Keywords:* Air pollution, Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD), Epidemiology,
PM_{2.5}, urban air pollution, MAIAC

*Abstract:*

*Background:* Air pollution from fine particulate matter (PM_{2.5}) is
associated with multiple adverse health effects. Estimates of PM_{2.5}
exposure for use in epidemiologic studies are often derived from
geographic characteristics using land-use regression or from assigning
values from a small number of fixed site monitors. Recent advances have
integrated these approaches with satellite-based measures of aerosol
optical depth (AOD), collected daily, which are both spatially and
temporally resolved. This approach allows for reconstruction of past
PM_{2.5} estimates at the locations of existing research studies. Mexico
City differs from other regions that have used satellite-based PM_{2.5}
models in several ways: it has bright land surfaces, a distinctive
climatological cycle that differs from more northern latitudes (United
States and Europe), and an elevated semi-enclosed air basin with a
unique planetary boundary layer dynamic.

*Objectives:* our goal was to present an expansion of this satellite
methodology which is also the first application in a region with
PM_{2.5} (mean daily concentration of 25.3μg/m^{3}) above those in most
US and European urban areas.

*Methods:* Using a novel measurement of AOD generated with 1km
resolution from the MODIS instrument, we constructed daily predictions
across the greater Mexico City area for 2004-2012. We calibrated the
association of AOD to PM_{2.5} daily using the municipal monitoring
network, local land use, estimates and meteorological features.
Predictions used spatial and temporal smoothing to estimate AOD when
satellite data were missing.

*Results:* Our model performed well, resulting in an out-of-sample cross
validation R^{2} of 0.72. Cross-validated RMSPE of the model was
5.83.Our Predictions had little to no bias with cross-validated slopes
(predicted vs observed) of 1.01 ± 0.008 s.e and 1.07 ± 0.004 s.e,
respectively, in the calibration and full coverage stages.

*Conclusions:* This novel model allows us to reconstruct long- and
short-term spatially resolved exposure to PM_{2.5} for epidemiological
studies in highly polluted urban areas.

*1.Introduction*

Mexico City is a megacity, with a population of more than 22 million.
Air pollution is a major public health threat in Mexico. The Mexican
National Institute of Statistics and Geography estimates that the total
cost of atmospheric contamination was 3.4% of national GDP in 2012\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(1). Effective quantitation of the health impacts of air pollution for
epidemiologic studies and policy analysis requires measurements that go
beyond the relatively sparse air monitoring network.

Mexico City is a very unique city that lies in an elevated basin 2240 m
above sea level. The basin is surrounded on three sides by mountain
ridges, but with a broad opening to the north and a narrower gap to the
south-southwest. There are over 40,000 industries and >5.5 million
vehicles passing through the city daily. The high altitude and tropical
insolation contribute to the formation of secondary particulate matter
(PM). Air quality is generally worse in the winter, when rain is less
common and thermal inversions are more frequent\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(2,3). These characteristics make modeling air pollution in Mexico City
extremely challenging.

Until recent years, epidemiologic studies on the health effects of
PM_{2.5} have typically used relatively crude exposure estimates (such
as central ground monitors), assigning these measurements to populations
within a specified distance of the monitor\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(4,5) . These exposure assignment methods have been used in studies of
the health impacts of air pollution in Mexico City\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(6--8). This crude exposure assignment can introduce exposure error and
most likely biases the effect estimates downward due to spatial
misalignment\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(9). To address this exposure misclassification, various tools have been
developed over the past few years\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(10--13) . A commonly used approach is land use regression (LUR), which
uses geographic covariates to expand in situ measurements of PM_{2.5}
concentrations to large areas. Yet since these geographic covariates are
mostly not time varying, the temporal resolution of LUR models are
limited and these are used mainly to assess chronic health effects.\\
 Recent improvements of LUR address some of its inherent limitations\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(14--16). Some of these approaches use newly available satellite data to
greatly expand the temporal variability as well as spatial coverage of
LUR. Satellite-based aerosol optical depth (AOD) is a physical
measurement collected daily that can be used to estimate air quality and
pollution. AOD is a measure of the extinction of electromagnetic
radiation at a given wavelength due to the presence of aerosols in the
atmospheric column. Chang and colleagues\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(17) have used new statistical downscaling and data fusion techniques to
predict PM_{2.5} concentrations at spatial point locations in the
southeastern United States during the period 2003--2005 using MODIS
(Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) satellite data. Their
model performed relatively well in cross-validated predictions
(R^{2}=0.78 and a root mean-squared error (RMSE) of 3.61 mg/m^{3}).
Chudnovsky and colleagues\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(18) used one year of observations from the newly developed Multi-Angle
Implementation of Atmospheric Correction (MAIAC) algorithm based on
MODIS. They used AOD data at 1 km spatial resolution to generate daily
PM_{2.5} estimates for co-located AOD and PM_{2.5} sites. The model
predictive performance spatially was similar to that estimated by Chang
et al. (spatial R^{2}= 0.79). More recently, our group\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(19) has used high resolution MAIAC data to develop models to predict
daily PM_{2.5} at a 1x1km resolution across the entire northeastern USA
for the years 2003-2011 which allowed us to better differentiate daily
and long term exposure between urban, suburban, and rural areas. Our
model performance was excellent (cross-validated predictions
R^{2}=0.88). In addition, our results revealed very little bias (slope
of predictions versus withheld observations = 0.99), which suggests that
residual error in estimates from this approach will be non-differential.

Although demonstrated successfully in the northeastern USA, it remains
uncertain how well the hybrid-satellite approach would perform in areas
which are significantly different from the northeastern USA in
geography, climate, and PM characteristics. In addition, Mexico City is
characterized with very bright surfaces which are a challenge for remote
sensing A number of geographic features distinguish the Mexico City
metropolitan area (MCMA) from other areas in which hybrid models have
been generated, particularly in the northeastern USA. These include the
meteorological patterns and seasonality, the semi-enclosed basin
confining regional pollution, the higher elevation and consequent less
efficient motor vehicle combustion, and the brightness of the land
surfaces which impacts the satellite AOD measure. The goal of this paper
was to use the new MAIAC AOD satellite data to estimate PM_{2.5} in the
MCMA adapting and extending the previous hybrid-model approach to
account for the unique challenges of the Mexico City region.

*2.Methods*

/*2.1 AOD Data*/

Daily MAIAC spectral AOD was derived from MODIS-based satellite data.
The new MAIAC algorithm provides a higher 1km resolution AOD product and
thus the generated AOD data was used above the Mexico City area for all
years in our analysis. The MAIAC data is based on collection 6 MODIS
Aqua L1B data for the years 2004-2014 which passes overhead in the early
afternoon and data were generated 10-15-2014. More in depth description
of the MAIAC product, details on the novel algorithm and processing can
be found in previous published papers\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(20,21). Because AOD values may be spurious at cloud edges, AOD data
were filtered to exclude values with adjacent cloud or high uncertainty
flags, and with a moving window variance in the top 2.5th percentile.

/*2.2 Monitoring data*/

Data for daily PM_{2.5} mass concentrations across Mexico City for the
study period (January 2nd 2004 to May 20, 2014) were downloaded from the
RAMA network of the atmospheric monitoring system of Mexico City\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(22). Daily PM_{2.5} concentrations were calculated as the mean of the
hourly measures (≥18 available) collected on tapered element oscillating
microbalance (TEOM) devices. The SIMAT also provided monitor locations
and meteorologic network data including temperature and wind
speed/direction. Three monitors in atypical locations with incomplete
temporal coverage were excluded leaving a total of 12 monitors. Data
from Christmas and New Years were outlying high values, potentially
associated with the use of fireworks. These two dates make up 18 out of
the 20 highest monitor-day observations in the dataset and were excluded
from model calibration.

/*2.3 Spatial and Temporal Predictors of PM_{2.5}*/

The multi-step regression modeling approach included AOD, classic land
use predictors and temporal predictors. Spatial covariates were
generated using ArcMap version 10.2\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(22). All spatial data were projected into UTM zone 14N. We used the
following spatial predictors:

/Elevation:/ Elevation data were added through a satellite-based digital
elevation model from the ASTER GDEM V2 (30 m resolution) and aggregated
to the mean elevation within each 1 km grid cell covering the entire
study area\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(23). There are sharp elevation contrasts across Mexico City and thus it
is an important spatial predictor (generally higher elevations are
associated with lower PM levels as well as lower air temperature). The
study area was restricted to the contiguous Mexico City valley area of
grid cells with elevation less than 3000 meters to avoid making
predictions in the uninhabited outlying mountains to the south west and
east of the city.

/Roadway Density:/ Roadway data were obtained from OpenStreetMap
(downloaded July 31, 2013; openstreetmap.org). Total road density was
calculated using the line density tool which is part of the ArcGIS
spatial analyst toolbox. This calculates the total polyline distance of
all roads per square kilometer around the centroids of the satellite AOD
cells across the study area.

We used the following temporal predictors:

/Meteorological data/: Temperature and wind speed/direction were
obtained through the atmospheric monitoring network of Mexico City
(SIMAT). Grid cells were matched to the closest weather station with
available daily means for these variables (>18 hourly measures).

/PBL:/ Hourly planetary boundary layer (mixing height) measures between
6:00 and 18:00 from a fixed site within the city were provided by the
Secretaría del Medio Ambiente\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(24) and included in the model as the mean of the morning measures. The
height of the boundary layer may vary with wind speed , influencing the
concentration and vertical profile of pollutants. The boundary layer not
only controls transport and location of pollutants and aerosols but also
their concentrations would be different in variable boundary layer
structures\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(25).

/Daily precipitation/: Daily precipitation measures (in mm) were entered
as a daily citywide mean obtained through Sistema de Aguas de la Ciudad
de México\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(26).

/Population at risk estimates:/ Demographic data were obtained from the
2010 Mexican National Census\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(27). We calculated the weight-averaged population for each 1km grid
cell centroid based on the census statistical areas (AGEBs) intersecting
these grid cells.

/*2.4 Statistical Methods*/

All modeling was done using the R statistical software version 3.1.2\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(28). In the Mexico City area there are large day-to-day differences in
mean PM_{2.5} concentration, PBL, temperature, and precipitation. These
daily differences create a varying spatial relationship between AOD and
PM_{2.5} for every single day and thus we chose to use a mixed effects
model as we have done in some of our previous studies\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(19,29,30). We incorporate spatial and temporal predictors and
day-specific random-effects to take into account these temporal
variations in the PM_{2.5}--AOD relationship. To generate the daily 1km
PM_{2.5} predictions in each grid cell for the entire period, we
developed an analytic process as follows:

The first stage calibrates the AOD grid-level observations to the
PM_{2.5} monitoring data using all monitor-day observations with the
closest available AOD value within 1.1km during the study period, while
adjusting for spatial and temporal covariates. Specifically, we fit the
following model*:*

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  PM_{ij} = (α + u_{j}) + (β1 + v_{j}) AOD_{ij} + β2 Temperature_{ij} +
  β3 Mean AM PBL_{j} + β4 √Precipitation_{j} + β5 log(Elevation)_{i} +
  β6 Roadway density_{i} + εij

  (uj vj) ~ [(o o), Σ ]
#+END_QUOTE

Where: PM_{ij} denotes the measured PM_{2.5} concentration at a spatial
site i on a day j; α and u_{j} are the fixed and random daily
intercepts, respectively, AOD_{ij} is the AOD value in the grid cell
corresponding to site i on day j; β1 and v_{j} are the fixed and random
slopes, respectively. Temperature_{ij}, is the value in the grid cells
corresponding to site i on a day j (β2 and κj are the fixed and random
slopes for temperature). Elevation_{i} and Roadway density_{i} are the
transformed means in grid cells corresponding to site i. Mean AM PBL_{j}
and Precipitation_{j} are the values on date j. Finally, Σ is an
unstructured variance-covariance matrix for the random effects.

Following this process we predicted daily PM_{2.5} concentrations in
grid cells /without/ monitors but /with/ available AOD measurements
using the Stage 1 model coefficients. This resulted in PM_{2.5}
prediction for all day-grid cell combinations with available satellite
based AOD.

In the second stage, in order to predict daily PM_{2.5} in grid cells
with no AOD on that day across the study area, we make use of the
city-wide association between grid-cell AOD and PM_{2.5} levels, and the
association between PM_{2.5} level in a given grid with that in
neighboring grid cells. We fit a generalized additive model with a
smooth function of latitude and longitude (using the grid cell
centroids). To allow for temporal variations in the spatial correlation,
we fit a separate spatial surface for each two-month period across the
study time period. Specifically, we fit the following model*:*

PredPM_{ij} = α + β_{1} MPM_{j} + s(X_{i},Y_{i}) _{k(j)} + ε_{ij},

where Pred/PM/_{ij} is the predicted PM_{2.5} concentration at a grid
cell i on a day /j/ from the first stage fit; /MPM_{j }/is the mean PM
across all monitors in MCMA on a day /j/; /α/ is the intercept, /β_{1}/
is the slope for the daily mean. The smooth /X/_{i}/,Y/_{i} are the
longitude and latitude, respectively, of the centroid of grid cell i,
and s(X_{i},Y_{i}) _{k(j)} is a tensor product smooth function of
location specific to the two-month period k(/j/) in which day j falls
(that is, the tensor-product term had an interaction to fit a separate
spatial smooth for each of the 63 two-month periods).

Model performance was assessed using monitor-level leave-one-out
cross-validation. Each monitor was withheld and predictions were
aggregated from refitting the model 12 times. To test our results for
bias, we regressed the measured PM_{2.5} concentration for a given
monitor and day against the corresponding predicted value generated
without the use of that monitor. We estimated the model prediction
precision by taking the square root of the mean squared prediction
errors (RMSPE).

*3. Results*

There were 12 PM_{2.5} monitors with unique locations operating across
the city during the study period. The mean daily PM_{2.5} across the
city during the study period was 25.3 μg/m^{3} with a standard deviation
of 10.3 μg/m^{3} and an interquartile range (IQR) of 17.79-31.49
μg/m^{3}.

Table 1 summarizes the the results from the calibration (stage 1) and
full coverage (stage 2) models. The model presented high cross-validated
fits across the entire study period, with a mean cross-validated R^{2}
of 0.72, and as expected a highly significant association between
PM_{2.5} and the main explanatory variable AOD (Beta=13.76, t=14.4)
(Table 1). The cross-validated RMSPE of calibration fits was 5.54 which
is considerably less than the observed variability in PM_{2.5}
concentrations in the MCMA.

[[media/image1.png]]

/Figure 1: Map of the study area showing the AOD grid boundaries, the
location of the city wide PM_{2.5} monitor stations and the elevation
contours./

The full coverage model also performed very well with a mean cross
validated R^{2} of 0.72, which is relatively high considering that this
model does not require satellite AOD to have been collected at the
day-location of the prediction and the closest ground measurement was
withheld for testing. The cross-validated RMSPE of the full coverage
model 5.83 which was only slightly larger than the calibration stage.
Predictions had little to no bias with cross-validated slopes (predicted
vs observed) of 1.01 ± 0.008 s.e and 1.07 ± 0.004 s.e, respectively, in
the calibration and full coverage stages.

Figure 2 presents the ground level PM2.5 and our cross-validated
predictions from the full coverage model for a representative monitor,
“CAM”, located in the middle of the city, for the year 2012. As can be
seen in the figure there is an excellent agreement between the ground
level PM_{2.5} and our cross-validated predictions.

[[media/image2.png]]Figure 2: Observations and cross-validated
predictions from the full coverage model for a representative monitor,
CAM, in the year 2012. Connected blue points are the daily observations
and red points are the daily predictions. Smoothed curves are loess
regression lines for observed (solid) and predicted (dashed).

Figure 3 shows the spatial pattern of our predicted PM_{2.5} averaged
over the entire study period. Mean predicted PM_{2.5} concentrations
range from 10.03 μg/m^{3} to 27.05 μg/m3 showing a good range of
variability for our model even in the long term average of the daily
predictions. By superimposing the fine scale predictions on 2010 census
units (AGEBs), we generate an estimate of the population at risk over
this study period (Figure 4).

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  [[media/image3.png]]
#+END_QUOTE

Figure 3: The overall mean PM_{2.5} predictions for all years
(2004-2014) across the entire study area

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  [[media/image4.png]]
#+END_QUOTE

Figure 4: Population PM_{2.5} exposure estimates for 2004-2014 shown as
density plot. While there is a small population with lower estimated
long term PM_{2.5} concentrations, 50% of the population in this greater
Mexico City area is exposed to at least 24.1 ug/m^{3} mean daily
PM_{2.5}.

*4.Discussion*

We present, to our knowledge, the first high spatially and temporally
resolved PM_{2.5} exposure model for the Mexico City Metropolitan Area
for a decadal period from 2004-2014. Using satellite measures, we
developed and validated models to predict daily PM_{2.5} at a 1*1 km
resolution across the large megacity region of the MCMA for the years
2004-2014, allowing us to differentiate daily and long-term intra city
exposure. We have shown excellent model performance in a region that is
challenging to model given the unique geographical and climatological
characteristics of the MCMA. Our model suggested the use of planetary
boundary layer and precipitation data as important predictors in this
complex area and additional preprocessing of MAIAC datasets over regions
with bright surfaces. The resulting daily predictions on a 1*1 km grid
offer exposure metrics for acute and chronic health outcome studies in
this understudied but highly exposed megacity. Given the large
population at risk (9 millions with more than 24.1 ug/m^{3} average
2004-2014), this daily exposure model will have great impact in studying
acute and chronic associations of air pollution with consequent
morbidity and mortality in the MCMA.

Relative to previously available exposure modeling approaches in the
MCMA\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
\\
(6), our model allows estimates even in areas within the city that are
not adjacent to the sparse air monitoring network and prospective
measurements going back a decade for existing epidemiologic datasets.
Thus, this model is well suited for use in epidemiologic studies
including cohorts

Our model is subject to several limitations, some of which apply to all
indirect exposure estimation methods. First, this model relies on a
relatively small network of ground monitors and this limits the ability
to consider how spatial covariates modify the association of AOD and
ground level PM_{2.5}. Although we add in satellite measures of AOD, the
satellite measures reflects particles in the entire air column and these
data need to be calibrated against the ground concentrations before use
in predictions. Although our 1km resolution predictions are the finest
resolution of AOD data that have been produced with more than 5000 daily
predictions over this urban region, and has 100x the areal density of
the more commonly used 10*10 km approach, it may not capture the effects
of very local effects such as residing directly next to a trafficed
roadway. Future models may incorporate these very local effects in a
third-stage LUR, as was recently applied in the Northeastern United
States (Kloog 2014). Similarly, this model may not capture aberrant
pollution events such as the fireworks associated with PM_{2.5} spikes
on Christmas and New Years. The inclusion of additional co-pollutants
may better parameterize the model and how source emissions patterns
alter the AOD-PM association. Because our model uses physical
measurements from the satellite, it cannot be used to forecast future
exposure levels and thus the benefit for environmental policy may be
primarily through understanding past and current patterns of exposure,
quantifying the impacts of previous interventions, and epidemiologic
studies of acute and chronic health effects. Ideal exposure assessment
for epidemiologic health studies would entail continuous personal
exposure monitoring. However, this monitoring is not logistically
feasible for large populations and can only be collected prospectively.
The use of a prediction model as we present here is also dependent on
accurate residential history and geocoding but will not capture exposure
events that happen exclusively indoors (e.g. cooking) or in other
microenvironments (e.g. inside vehicles). However, the open architechure
and low prevalence of air conditioning in Mexico City means that outdoor
air pollution easily mixes with indoor air and our model is a reasonable
estimate of pollution exposure in the home minus these additional
sources.

Future iterations of this model may benefit from further developments of
the MAIAC algorithm to derive AOD over brighter surfaces and combine
these AOD measures from the Aqua satellite with measures from the second
MODIS instrument on NASA's Terra satellite. In addition, it may be
possible to expand this approach to other regions of Mexico,
particularly in the larger Megalopolis (the region including the MCMA
and surrounding states) utilizing additional municipal ground monitoring
networks.

*5. Acknowledgments*

We thank the staff of the INSP and the INE for assisting in collecting
geospatial datasets. Grant support came from NIEHS Grant K99 ES023450
(ACJ)

*6. References*

1. INEGI. CUENTAS ECONÓMICAS Y ECOLÓGICAS DE MÉXICO [Internet]. 2012.
Available from:
http://www.inegi.org.mx/inegi/contenidos/espanol/prensa/Boletines/Boletin/Comunicados/Especiales/2014/febrero/comunica48.pdf

2. Molina LT, Madronich S, Gaffney J, Apel E, Foy B de, Fast J, et al.
An overview of the MILAGRO 2006 Campaign: Mexico City emissions and
their transport and transformation. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics.
Copernicus GmbH; 2010;10(18):8697--8760.

3. De Foy B, Caetano E, Magana V, Zitácuaro A, Cárdenas B, Retama A, et
al. Mexico City basin wind circulation during the MCMA-2003 field
campaign. Atmospheric Chemistry & Physics [Internet]. 2005;5:2267--2288.
Available from: http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005ACP.....5.2267D
http://www.atmos-chem-phys.net/5/2267/2005/acp-5-2267-2005.pdf

4. Laden F, Schwartz J, Speizer FE, Dockery DW. Reduction in fine
particulate air pollution and mortality: extended follow-up of the
Harvard Six Cities study. American journal of respiratory and critical
care medicine. Am Thoracic Soc; 2006;173(6):667--672.

5. Ebelt ST, Wilson WE, Brauer M. Exposure to ambient and nonambient
components of particulate matter: a comparison of health effects.
Epidemiology. LWW; 2005;16(3):396--405.

6. Romieu I, Meneses F, Ruiz S, Sienra JJ, Huerta J, White MC, et al.
Effects of air pollution on the respiratory health of asthmatic children
living in Mexico City. American journal of respiratory and critical care
medicine. Am Thoracic Soc; 1996;154(2):300--307.

7. Escamilla-Nunez M-C, Barraza-Villarreal A, Hernandez-Cadena L,
Moreno-Macias H, Ramirez-Aguilar M, Sienra-Monge J-J, et al.
Traffic-related air pollution and respiratory symptoms among asthmatic
children, resident in Mexico City: the EVA cohort study. Respiratory
research [Internet]. 2008 Jan;9:74. Available from:
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2613139&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract

8. Calderon-Garciduenas L, Kulesza RJ, Doty RL, D'Angiulli A,
Torres-Jardon R. Megacities air pollution problems: Mexico City
Metropolitan Area critical issues on the central nervous system
pediatric impact. Environmental Research [Internet]. 2015
Feb;137:157--169. Available from:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013935114004630

9. Zeger SL, Thomas D, Dominici F, Samet JM, Schwartz J, Dockery D, et
al. Exposure measurement error in time-series studies of air pollution:
concepts and consequences. Environ Health Perspect [Internet].
2000;108(5):419--26. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Citation&list\_uids=10811568

10. Vienneau D, De Hoogh K, Beelen R, Fischer P, Hoek G, Briggs D.
Comparison of land-use regression models between Great Britain and the
Netherlands. Atmospheric Environment [Internet].
2010;44(5):688������696. Available from:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231009009601

11. Hoek G, Beelen R, Hoogh K de, Vienneau D, Gulliver J, Fischer P, et
al. A review of land-use regression models to assess spatial variation
of outdoor air pollution. Atmospheric Environment [Internet]. 2008
Oct;42(33):7561--7578. Available from:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231008005748

12. Gryparis A, Paciorek CJ, Zeka A, Schwartz J, Coull BA. Measurement
error caused by spatial misalignment in environmental epidemiology.
Biostatistics (Oxford, England) [Internet]. 2009 Apr;10(2):258--274.
Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18927119

13. Beckerman BS, Jerrett M, Serre M, Martin RV, Lee S-J, Donkelaar A
van, et al. A hybrid approach to estimating national scale
spatiotemporal variability of PM2. 5 in the contiguous United States.
Environmental science & technology [Internet]. ACS Publications;
2013;47(13):7233--7241. Available from:
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es400039u

14. Sampson PD, Richards M, Szpiro AA, Bergen S, Sheppard L, Larson TV,
et al. A Regionalized National Universal Kriging Model using Partial
Least Squares Regression for Estimating Annual PM< sub> 2.5</sub>
Concentrations in Epidemiology. Atmospheric Environment [Internet].
2013; Available from:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231013002604

15. Liu Y, Paciorek CJ, Koutrakis P. Estimating Regional Spatial and
Temporal Variability of PM2.5 Concentrations Using Satellite Data,
Meteorology, and Land Use Information. Environ Health Perspect.
2009;117:886--892.

16. Bergen S, Sheppard L, Sampson PD, Kim S-Y, Richards M, Vedal S, et
al. A national prediction model for PM2. 5 component exposures and
measurement error--corrected health effect inference. Environmental
health perspectives. National Institute of Environmental Health Science;
2013;121(9):1017.

17. Chang HH, Hu X, Liu Y. Calibrating MODIS aerosol optical depth for
predicting daily PM2. 5 concentrations via statistical downscaling.
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology [Internet].
2013; Available from:
http://www.nature.com/jes/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/jes201390a.html

18. Chudnovsky AA, Koutrakis P, Kloog I, Melly S, Nordio F, Lyapustin A,
et al. Fine particulate matter predictions using high resolution aerosol
optical depth (AOD) retrievals. Atmospheric Environment [Internet]. 2014
Feb; Available from:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231014001150

19. Kloog I, Chudnovsky AA, Just AC, Nordio F, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, et
al. A New Hybrid Spatio-Temporal Model For Estimating Daily Multi-Year
PM< sub> 2.5</sub> Concentrations Across Northeastern USA Using High
Resolution Aerosol Optical Depth Data. Atmospheric Environment.
Elsevier; 2014 Jul;

20. Lyapustin A, Wang Y, Laszlo I, Kahn R, Korkin S, Remer L, et al.
Multiangle implementation of atmospheric correction (MAIAC): 2. Aerosol
algorithm. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres (1984������2012)
[Internet]. 2011;116(D3). Available from:
http://www.agu.org/journals/jd/jd1103/2010JD014986/

21. Lyapustin A, Martonchik J, Wang Y, Laszlo I, Korkin S. Multiangle
implementation of atmospheric correction (MAIAC): 1. Radiative transfer
basis and look-up tables. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres
(1984������2012) [Internet]. 2011;116(D3). Available from:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2010JD014985/full

22. ESRI. ArcGIS. Redlands, California: ESRI; 2014.

23. ASTER. ASTER Global Digital Elevation Map. NASA- Jet Propulsion
Labratory; 2014.

24. SMA. Secretaría del Medio Ambiente [Internet]. Secretaría del Medio
Ambiente; 2014. Available from: http://www.semarnat.gob.mx/

25. Oke TR. Boundary layer climates. Psychology Press; 1987.

26. SACMEX. Subdirección de Macromedición y Control de Redes. GOBIERNO
DEL DISTRITO FEDERAL.Sistema de Aguas de la Ciudad de México; 2014.

27. INEGI. CUENTAS ECONÓMICAS Y ECOLÓGICAS DE MÉXICO [Internet]. 2012.
Available from:
http://www.inegi.org.mx/inegi/contenidos/espanol/prensa/Boletines/Boletin/Comunicados/Especiales/2014/febrero/comunica48.pdf

28. R. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing
[Internet]. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing;
2014. Available from: http://www.R-project.org/

29. Kloog I, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J. Assessing
temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological
studies using satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmospheric
Environment [Internet]. 2011 Aug;45(35):6267--6275. Available from:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231011009125

30. Kloog I, Nordio F, Coull BA, Schwartz J. Incorporating local land
use regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model of
spatiotemporal PM2. 5 exposures in the Mid-Atlantic states.
Environmental science & technology [Internet]. 2012
Sep;46(21):11913--11921. Available from:
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es302673e
