Article pubs.acs.org/est

Incorporating Local Land Use Regression And Satellite Aerosol Optical
Depth In A Hybrid Model Of Spatiotemporal PM2.5 Exposures In The
Mid-Atlantic States Itai Kloog,†,* Francesco Nordio,† Brent A. Coull,‡
and Joel Schwartz† †

Department of Environmental HealthExposure, Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Drive
West, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, United States ‡ Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts
02215, United States ABSTRACT: Satellite-derived aerosol optical depth
(AOD) measurements have the potential to provide spatiotemporally
resolved predictions of both long and short-term exposures, but previous
studies have generally shown moderate predictive power and lacked
detailed high spatio- temporal resolution predictions across large
domains. We aimed at extending our previous work by validating our model
in another region with diﬀerent geographical and metrological
characteristics, and incorporating ﬁne scale land use regression and
nonrandom missingness to better predict PM2.5 concentrations for days
with or without satellite AOD measures. We start by calibrating AOD data
for 2000−2008 across the Mid-Atlantic. We used mixed models regressing
PM 2.5 measurements against day-speciﬁc random intercepts, and ﬁxed and
random AOD and temperature slopes. We used inverse probability weighting
to account for nonrandom missingness of AOD, nested regions within days
to capture spatial variation in the daily calibration, and introduced a
penalization method that reduces the dimensionality of the large number
of spatial and temporal predictors without selecting diﬀerent predictors
in diﬀerent locations. We then take advantage of the association between
grid-cell speciﬁc AOD values and PM2.5 monitoring data, together with
associations between AOD values in neighboring grid cells to develop
grid cell predictions when AOD is missing. Finally to get local
predictions (at the resolution of 50 m), we regressed the residuals from
the predictions for each monitor from these previous steps against the
local land use variables speciﬁc for each monitor. “Out-of-sample”
10-fold cross-validation was used to quantify the accuracy of our
predictions at each step. For all days without AOD values, model
performance was excellent (mean “out-ofsample” R2 = 0.81, year-to-year
variation 0.79−0.84). Upon removal of outliers in the PM2.5 monitoring
data, the results of the cross validation procedure was even better
(overall mean ”out of sample” R2 of 0.85). Further, cross validation
results revealed no bias in the predicted concentrations (Slope of
observed vs predicted = 0.97−1.01). Our model allows one to reliably
assess shortterm and long-term human exposures in order to investigate
both the acute and eﬀects of ambient particles, respectively. error, and
likely biases the eﬀect estimates downward.14 In addition, a key
limitation is that they are unable to produce estimates in locations
without monitors nearby, and people who live in more densely populated
areas are unlikely to be representative of those who do not. Land use
(LU) regression exposure models are commonly used in health studies, yet
since the LU terms are generally not time varying, their temporal
resolution tends to be limited, and based on the spatial resolution of
the available PM 2.5 monitoring network.15−18 Land use terms capture
traﬃc and point sources, but spatial smoothing is required to capture
variation in secondary aerosols. In addition the coeﬃcients of the land
use terms are determined by land patterns around ambient monitoring
stations, whose locations may be nonrepresentative of LU in general in
the U.S. These same

1. INTRODUCTION Fine Particulate Matter (PM) is a complex mixture of
   particles primarily composed of sulfate (SO4), nitrates
   (NO3),ammonium (NH4), elemental carbon (EC), organic compounds (OC),
   and various metals.1 PM originates from a variety of stationary and
   mobile sources and may be directly emitted (primary emissions) or
   formed in the atmosphere by transformation of gaseous emissions
   (secondary emissions). Multiple studies have demonstrated the
   association between both short- and long-term exposures to PM2.5
   (particulate matter that is 2.5 μm or smaller in diameter) and
   adverse health eﬀects. Multiple health eﬀects have been shown
   including asthma,2,3 cardiovascular problems,4,5 respiratory
   infections,4,6 mortality7−9 and lower birth weights.10−13 This
   adverse association has been demonstrated for a wide range of
   concentration levels in various regions of the world, yet an
   important limitation of most previous studies is that they all rely
   upon a limited number of PM2.5 monitoring sites placed within the
   study area. Because these sites do not measure individual-speciﬁc
   exposure, this approach introduces exposure © 2012 American Chemical
   Society

Received: Revised: Accepted: Published: 11913

July 3, 2012 September 24, 2012 September 26, 2012 September 26, 2012
dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921

Environmental Science & Technology

Article

2. MATERIAL AND METHODS 2.1. Study Domain. The spatial domain of our
   study included the Mid-Atlantic region in the U.S. comprising the
   states of Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Washington
   DC, Virginia, New York, and West Virginia (Figure 1). They cover an
   area of 495 486 km2 and have a

locations drive the spatial smoothing of LU. Hence extrapolation of
predictions from these models to other areas involves error and may
yield biased estimates of exposure. A further limitation of LU models is
that they do not provide predictions for acute (short-term exposure)
studies. Satellite data in general and particularly satellite derived
aerosol optical depth (AOD) data provides another important tool for
monitoring aerosols due to its large spatial coverage and reliable
repeated physical measurements, particularly for areas and exposure
scenarios where surface PM2.5 monitors are not available.19−22 We have
recently published a novel hybrid method to predict daily temporally and
spatially resolved PM2.5 across New England for the years 2000−2008.22
These predictions, which are based on land use regression plus a daily
calibration of PM2.5 ground measurements and MODIS (moderate resolution
imaging spectroradiometer) satellite AOD, allow for the prediction of
daily PM2.5 concentration levels at the resolution of a 10 × 10 km
spatial grid. Model performance was excellent, even for days having no
AOD data. 10-fold out-of-sample cross validation yielded a mean
“out-ofsample” R2 of 0.81. By averaging our estimated daily exposures at
each location we can generated long-term exposures. This enabled us to
generate both the short-term and long-term eﬀects of ambient particles,
respectively. We have used those estimates to assess the association of
PM2.5 with both hospital admissions in New England and birth weight for
all births in Massachusetts. Although our model performance was
excellent, it is important to validate it in another region with
diﬀerent geographical and meteorological characteristics. In addition,
there is room for further methodological improvements in our model. For
example, AOD data availability is much greater in the summer periods
compared to the winter period. This is mostly due to heavily clouded
days or snow cover in winter periods which results in missing AOD data.
This nonrandom missingness of AOD readings could cause selection bias,
which could in turn negatively aﬀect predictive performance.. Also,
treating large areas, such as the Mid-Atlantic region of the United
States, as one region can add additional bias since there may be
geographic variations in the daily calibration between PM2.5 and AOD.
Finally, land use regressions typically start with a large number of
land use terms, and choose a subset by methods that risk overﬁtting and
result in diﬀerent variable choices in diﬀerent models. In addition,
space time interactions are rarely accommodated. Thus in this paper we
extend our previous work in NewEngland by upgrading and validating our
model using the MidAtlantic area in the eastern part of the U.S.
Speciﬁcally, we developed and validated models to predict daily PM2.5 at
a 10 × 10 km resolution and at local addresses across the Mid-Atlantic
region for the years 2000−2008. We updated the model by adding inverse
probability weights to account for missing days when AOD cannot be
included in the primary analysis due to its missingness. We divided the
Mid-Atlantic area into 7 regions based on the geography of the region
and incorporate nested day-speciﬁc calibration of the AOD- PM2.5
relation by region. Additionally we developed an approach that allows us
to include all land use and meteorological variables and their
interactions, with appropriate shrinkage back to their mean eﬀect by
category (e.g., land use, temporal, and interaction).

Figure 1. Map of the study area showing the full AOD grid, the regions
and all PM2.5 monitor station across the Mid-Atlantic.

population of 57 303 316.23 The Mid-Atlantic States include some of the
largest metropolitan areas in the U.S. including, among others,
Baltimore, Washington, Philadelphia, New York, Newark, and Pittsburgh.
2.2. AOD Data. The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)
sits aboard the Earth Observing System (EOS) satellites.24,25 The Terra
and Aqua satellites were launched in December 18, 1999 and in May
fourth, 2002 respectively. The satellites are polar-orbiting satellites
and operate at an altitude of approximately 700 km. Their sensors scan
the swath of 2330 km (cross-track) by 10 km (along-track at nadir). For
Terra, the local equatorial crossing time is approximately 10:30 a.m.
while for Aqua it is 13:30 p.m. Both satellites perform measurements in
the visible to thermal infrared spectrum region. One of the fundamental
aerosol products from MODIS is spectral AOD (also known as aerosol
optical thickness-AOT). MODIS level 2 ﬁles are produced daily, and
represent the ﬁrst level of MODIS aerosol retrieval. Bands 1 through 7
are devised to study aerosols, and a number of other bands help with
cloud rejection and other screening procedures. The aerosol algorithm
relies on calibrated, geolocated reﬂectance Level 1B data.25 More
details about MODIS satellite data have been reported.26,27 Daily data
are freely available online through the NASA Web site.28 For the
analysis presented here daily MODIS level 2 ﬁles from the Terra
satellite for the years 2000− 2008 were used at the spatial resolution
of 10 × 10 km at nadir. MODIS AOD pixel centroids constantly shift daily
between orbits, thus we created a ﬁxed 10 × 10 km grid. Daily values of
AOD were assigned to the grid cell where the AOD retrieval's centroid
was located. Aqua satellite data was not used since it was only launched
late 2002. Although there are other satellites that measure AOD, the
MODIS satellite was used since it is the most validated (using AERONET),
accessible and accurate data set available today.29 2.3. Monitoring
Data. Data for daily PM2.5 mass concentrations across the Mid-Atlantic
region (see Figure 1) 11914

dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921

Environmental Science & Technology

Article

In our prediction models we accommodate the two most common data types
in health studies: small area (census areas, postal code areas etc.)
geocoded data (SAGD) and residencespeciﬁc latitude and longitude
geocoded data (RGD). When using SAGD we use only our grid cell model (at
a 10 × 10 km spatial resolution) while when RGD are available, we use a
local land use regression component. To estimate PM2.5 concentrations in
each grid cell on each day we run the prediction process in four stages.
We ﬁrst summarize the stages here before presenting the regression model
used at each stage. The Stage 1 model calibrates the AOD grid-level
observations to the PM2.5 monitoring data collected within 10 km of an
AOD reading by regressing PM2.5 monitoring data on AOD values and other
predictors. Because the relationship between AOD and PM2.5 varies day to
day (due to diﬀerences in mixing height, relative humidity, particle
composition, vertical proﬁles, etc), this calibration is performed on a
daily basis. Further, because the mid-Atlantic area of the U.S. is
relatively large and this PM-AOD relationship can vary spatially, we
partitioned mid-Atlantic study area is divided into seven regions and
assumed this calibration additionally varied by region. In Stage 2 we
predict PM2.5 concentrations in grid cells without monitors but with
available AOD measurements using the Stage 1 ﬁt. This is achieved by
simply applying the estimated prediction equation obtained from the
model ﬁt in Stage 1 to these additional AOD values. In Stage 3, to
estimate PM2.5 concentrations in cells where no AOD data is missing, we
ﬁt a model that uses predicted levels of PM2.5 from Stage 2 and spatial
associations among PM2.5 levels on a given day to estimate daily PM2.5
in cells not having AOD on a given day. These ﬁrst three steps are
applied to the data at the 10 × 10 km grid cell level. To calculate the
local PM2.5 concentrations in studies using RGD, we take the residuals
of the Stage 3 model at each monitoring site and regress them against
local (50 m buﬀer) LU terms at each monitor. The ﬁtted values from this
local regression stage are then added back to the grid-level predictions
obtained in Stage 3 to produce residence-level predictions. 2.6.1. Stage
1. The base model (Stage 1) consists of a mixed model that regresses
PM2.5 monitoring data on grid-level AOD values, temperature, and other
land-use regression terms. To perform this PM2.5-AOD calibration on a
day-speciﬁc and region-speciﬁc basis, the coeﬃcients in this model were
assumed to be random eﬀects, meaning these terms vary across the
population of days and regions according to some random distribution.
These day-region terms are nested, such that a coeﬃcient for a given
region-day combination varies randomly around an overall coeﬃcient
speciﬁc to that day, which itself varies across the entire population of
days in which AOD is available. This structure is assumed for the
intercepts, AOD slopes, and temperature slopes in the model. In
addition, a moderately large number of additional spatial, temporal
(daily), and spatiotemporal predictors are included as predictors in the
PM2.5 model. Because use of many predictors can lead to overﬁtting and
lack of precision of the resulting estimates, we allow the eﬀect of each
variable to be unique but shrink groups of these eﬀects back to a common
mean, which represents a form of regularization, or penalization, of the
resulting coeﬃcients that can stabilize estimation and avoid overﬁtting.
We group these coeﬃcients into the spatial terms, the temporal terms,
and the spatiotemporal terms, and shrink each set of coeﬃcients back
toward a mean for each of these three groups of variables. The shrinkage
is accomplished by

for the years 2000−2008 were obtained from the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) Air Quality System (AQS) database as well as the
IMPROVE (Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments)
network. IMPROVE monitor sites are located in national parks and
wilderness areas while EPA monitoring sites are located across the
Mid-Atlantic including urban areas such as New York city, Washington,
DC, Baltimore, etc. There were 161 monitors with unique locations
operating in the Mid-Atlantic during the study period. The Mean PM2.5
across the Mid-Atlantic during the study period was 13.59 μg/m3 with a
standard deviation of 8.52 μg/m3 and a 10.10 μg/m3 interquartile range
(IQR). 2.4. Spatial Predictors of PM2.5. The available spatial
predictors for our model were percent of open space, population density,
elevation, traﬃc density, PM2.5 point emissions and area-source PM2.5
emissions. 2.4.1. Percent of Open Spaces. Percent of open spaces data
were obtained through the 2001 national land cover data (NLCD)
multiresolution land characteristics consortium (MRLC).30 Data were
obtained as raster ﬁles with 30 m cell size. Percent of open space
included all areas such as parks, forestry, golf courses, and vegetation
planted in developed settings for recreation, erosion control, or
aesthetic purposes. 2.4.2. Elevation. Elevation data were obtained
through the national elevation data set (NED).31 NED is distributed by
the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and provides seamless raster elevation
data of the conterminous United States. The NED is released in
geographic coordinates at a resolution of 1 arc sec. 2.4.3. Traﬃc
Density. Road data were obtained through the U.S. census 2000
topologically integrated geographic encoding and referencing system
(TIGER)32. We calculated the total A1 road length (class 1 roads that
are hard surface highways including Interstate and U.S. numbered
highways, primary State routes, and all controlled access highways)
across the MidAtlantic. The A1 roads were intersected with the 10 × 10
grid cell and the resulting attribute tables contained the density of
all A1 road segment lengths in the 10 km grid. 2.4.4. PM 2.5 Point
Emissions. PM2.5 point emissions were obtained through the 2005 U.S.
Environmental Protetion Agency (USEPA) National Emissions Inventory
(NEI) facility emissions report.33 Because the distributions of point
source emissions were highly right-skewed, the emission values were log
transformed. Locations reporting zero emissions within the appropriate
grid were assigned a value of one-half of the minimum value among all
monitoring locations. 2.4.5. Area-Source PM2.5 Emissions. Area-source
PM2.5 emissions data were obtained through the 2005 USEPA-NEI tiered
emissions reports,33 which provide estimates of total area-source
emissions of PM2.5 by county and year. Intersecting source emission
areas for each 10 × 10 km grid were weight averaged and similarly
log-transformed. 2.5. Temporal Predictors of PM2.5. 2.5.1. Meteorologic
Data. All meteorological variables used in the analysis (temperature,
wind speed, visibility and relative humidity) were obtained through the
national climatic data center (NCDC).34 Only continuous operating
stations with daily data running from 2000 to 2008 were used (26
stations). Grid cells were matched to the closest weather station for
meteorological variables. 2.6. Statistical Methods. All modeling was
done using the R statistical software version 2.15.0 and SAS
(Statistical Analysis System) version 9.3. 11915

dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921

Environmental Science & Technology

Article

treating the coeﬃcient of each variable as a random slope, and shrinking
coeﬃcient back to the group-speciﬁc mean. We standardize each of these
variables to have standard deviation 1. Therefore, this mean coeﬃcient,
represented in the model as a ﬁxed eﬀect, represents the mean eﬀect on
PM2.5, averaged across the variables in that group of covariates. In the
ﬁnal model we leave only the random slopes for the spatiotemporal terms
since the separate spatial and temporal terms have a relatively small
number of covariates and were not statistically signiﬁcant. However, we
present the full model here for cases in which more predictors are
candidates for inclusion in the model. Taken all together, the ﬁrst
stage of the model can be written as follows:

where (p) is the probability of AOD availability on each day in each
grid cell in each year. We then use the inverse probability weights in
the above mixed model. There were no observations which had a
disproportionate inﬂuence in the yearly models.

⎛1⎞ IPW = ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ p̂ ⎠ The Stage 1 model was ﬁt to data from each year
(2000− 2008) separately. To validate the ﬁrst stage of our model, the
data set was repeatedly randomly divided into 90% and 10% splits.
Predictions for the held-out 10% of the data were made from the model ﬁt
of the remaining 90% of the data. This “out of sample” process was
repeated ten times and cross-validated (CV) R2 values were computed. To
check for bias we regressed the measured PM2.5 values against the
predicted values in each held out site on each day. Overall temporal R2
was calculated by regressing Delta PM against Delta predicted where:
Delta PM is the diﬀerence between the observed PM2.5 at a given site on
a given day and the annual mean PM2.5 at that location, and Delta
predicted is deﬁned similarly for the predicted values generated from
the model. Overall spatial R2 was calculated by regressing the annual
mean PM2.5 at a given site against the annual mean predicted PM2.5 at
that location. We also tested the model performance (CV) for a test year
(2001) without including AOD (only MET and LU variables were regressed
against PM2.5 with a random intercept by date and a random slope for
temperature) and by using a traditional kriging method. 2.6.2. Stage 2.
The next stage (Stage 2), uses the ﬁt of the Stage 1 model to predict a
PM2.5 concentration for each day and grid at which we have an observed
AOD value. This resulted in yearly data sets with PM2.5 prediction for
all dayAOD cell available combinations yet still no predictions in
daycell combinations with missing AOD data. 2.6.3. Stage 3. In Stage 3
of the model, we estimated daily PM2.5 concentration levels for all grid
cells in the study domain for days when AOD data were unavailable. Using
the PM2.5 predictions obtained from the ﬁrst stage of the model as the
response, we ﬁt a model containing a smooth function of latitude and
longitude (of the grid cell centroid) and a random intercept for each
cell. This is similar to universal kriging, extended to include the mean
of the PM2.5 monitors on that day (the average PM2.5 concentrations
measured at all the available PM2.5 monitors in the region on each day)
and random cell-speciﬁc slope. To allow for temporal variations in the
spatial correlation, a separate spatial surface was ﬁt for each
two-month period of each year. Using this method provides additional
information about the concentration in the missing grid cells that
simple kriging would not. Speciﬁcally this stage (Stage 3) ﬁts the
following semiparametric regression model:

PMij = (α + u j +gj(reg)) + (β1 + vj + hj(reg))AODij 3

-  (β2 + k j)Temperatureij +

∑ γ1mX1mi m=1

6

-  

18

∑ γ2mX 2mj + ∑ γ3mX3mij + εij m=1

m=1

(u jvjk j) ∼ N[(000), Σ] (gj(reg), hj(reg)) ∼ N[(00), Σ REG]
(γ11,...γ1,3) ∼ N[γ1, σ 21] (γ21,...γ2,6) ∼ N[γ2 , σ 2 2]

(γ31,...γ3,18) ∼ N[γ2 , σ 2 3]

where PMij is the measured PM2.5 concentration at a spatial site i on a
day j; α and uj are the ﬁxed and random day-speciﬁc intercepts,
respectively, AODij is the AOD value in the grid cell corresponding to
site i on a day j; β1 and vj are the ﬁxed and random day-speciﬁc slopes,
respectively. Temperatureij is the temperature value in the grid the
cell corresponding to site i on a day j (β2 and kj are the ﬁxed and
random slopes for temperature). X1mi is the value of the mth spatial
predictor at site i, X2mj is the value of the mth temporal predictor on
day j, and X1mij is the value of the mth spatial-temporal predictor at
site i on day j. gj(reg) and hj(reg) are the daily random intercepts and
AOD slopes speciﬁc to each study area region. Here, we assume Σ is a 3 ×
3 diagonal matrix with diagonal elements σ2u, σ2v, σ2k, and ΣREG is a 2
× 2 diagonal matrix with diagonal elements σ2g, σ2h. Second, to
accommodate the fact that daily AOD data missingness is not random, the
ﬁrst-stage model incorporated inverse probability weighting (IPW) to
potentially avoid bias in the regression coeﬃcient estimates and thus in
the resulting predictions. This approach eﬀectively up-weights dates and
grid cells which are under-represented due to a large degree of missing
data. To obtain the weights that account for the nonrandom missingness
in AOD values, we ﬁt the following model for the probability (p) of
observing an AOD value in cell i on day j, ﬁt separately from the Stage
1 model:

PredPMij = (α + u i) + (β1 + v)MPM i j + Smooth (X, Y)k(j) + εij

(u jvj) ∼ [(00), Ωβ]

where PredPMij is the predicted PM2.5 concentration at a spatial site i
on a day j from the second stage model; MPMj is the mean PM in the
relevant region on a day j; α and ui are the ﬁxed and grid-cell speciﬁc
random intercepts, respectively; β1 and vi are the ﬁxed and grid-cell
speciﬁc random slopes, respectively. The smooth X,Y is a thin plate
spline ﬁt to the

⎛ p̂ ⎞ ln⎜ ⎟ = β0 + β1elevation i + β2 sea line pressureij ⎝ 1 − p̂ ⎠ +
β3temperatureij + month 11916

dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921

Environmental Science & Technology

Article

Figure 2. Scatter map of the AOD-PM relationship before and after the
calibration.

Table 1. Prediction Accuracy: Ten-Fold Cross Validated R2 for PM2.5
Stage 1 Predictions (Calibration Stage for 2000-2008) yearly data set

CV R2

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 mean 2000−2008

0.83 0.81 0.79 0.86 0.81 0.78 0.84 0.82 0.76 0.81

intercepta 0.23 0.42 0.52 −0.15 0.19 −0.11 0.26 0.06 0.01

± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±

0.10 0.09 0.11 0.10 0.10 0.12 0.09 0.09 0.11

slopea 0.98 0.97 0.97 1.01 0.99 1.01 0.98 1.00 1.00

± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±

CV R2

0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01

spatial

0.73 0.69 0.77 0.74 0.70 0.69 0.76 0.82 0.74 0.74

CV R2

temporal

0.84 0.82 0.79 0.87 0.82 0.80 0.85 0.82 0.76 0.82

RMSPEb 1.57 1.35 1.30 1.50 1.50 1.70 1.22 1.08 1.20 1.38

μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3

Presented as parameter estimate ± SE from linear regression of held-out
observations versus predictions. bRoot of the mean squared prediction
errors. a

residuals, and εij is the error. In contrast to Stage 1, where land use
terms were grid cell averages, for this model land use terms were all
computed for a 50 m radius about the monitor, to capture local eﬀects.
The models used cubic penalized splines within a mixed model framework,
as implemented in the GAMM function in R. We used the default amount of
smoothing for each nonlinear term in the model. We calculated prediction
errors for the spatial components in each stage (to be comparable to all
previous available model which do not have daily measurements) by
subtracting retained observations from the model predictions. We
estimated the model prediction precision by taking the square root of
the mean squared prediction errors (RMSPE).35

latitude and longitude, k(j) denotes the two-month period in which day j
falls (that is, a separate spatial smooth was ﬁt for each two-month
period). To estimate the goodness of ﬁt, we dropped “all observations”
at a particular site each time (ten times and taking out 10% of speciﬁc
monitors). Then the cross validation was performed against PM2.5
stations that were left out altogether from the analysis. This “out of
sample” process was repeated ten times and CV R2 values were computed.
2.6.4. Stage 4. Finally, for cases in which health outcomes are resolved
to the speciﬁc longitude and latitude for a given study subject
residence, we ﬁt a local PM stage (Stage 4) that takes the residuals
constructed by taking the diﬀerence between a given monitored PM2.5
concentration and the 10 × 10 km grid prediction from Stage 3 for the
grid in which that monitor is located, and regresses these residuals on
location-speciﬁc predictors of pollution. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁt the
following model

3. RESULTS Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of the AOD-PM2.5
   relationship before (Figure 2a) and after (Figure 2b) the Stage 1
   calibration showing the signiﬁcant ﬁt improvement gained by
   calibrating with our Stage 1 model. Table 1 presents the results from
   the Stage 1 analysis. The yearly models all presented very good
   out-of-sample predictive performance for each year and the entire
   study period, with a mean out of sample R2 of 0.81 (year to year
   variation 0.76− 0.86), and as expected a highly signiﬁcant
   association between PM2.5 and the main explanatory variable-AOD
   (Table 1). In addition the Stage 1 results revealed that adding the
   IPW in the model greatly reduced the bias in our cross validation
   results (Slope of observed vs predicted = 0.97−1.01).

residPMij = f1 (traffic densityi, population density) i + f2
(elevationi) + f3 (percent urba) + f 4(distance to A1 roadi) + +f5
(distance to point emissions j) + εij

where ResidPMij is the residual at a spatial monitor site i on day j; f1
denotes a penalized spline for an interaction between traﬃc density and
population density;, f 2 − f5 denote (potentially nonlinear) eﬀects of
elevation, percent urbanicity, distance to A1 road, and distance to
point emissions, respectively, on these 11917

dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921

Environmental Science & Technology

Article

The spatial and temporal out of sample results also presented very good
ﬁts to the held out data (Table 1): For the temporal model the mean out
of sample R2 was 0.82 (year to year variation 0.76−0.87) and for the
spatial model the mean out of sample R2 was 0.74 (year to year variation
0.69−0.82). The results for the 2001 test models excluding AOD, showed
that using standard LU regression models (LU+MET) results in much lower
CV predictive power (R2 = 0.67 compared to 0.81 in our AOD models).
Using traditional Kriging methods our predictive R2 was even lower
(0.53). These results indicate that by using the AOD measurements we can
improve our model ﬁt quite signiﬁcantly. The results of the 2001 test
model without the weights revealed an R2 of 0.79 which is almost 2% less
than the model with the weights. Also the bias increases a bit without
the weights (slope of 0.96 vs 0.97 with the weights). The Stage 3 models
are presented in Table 2. All models performed well with a mean out of
sample R2 of 0.81 (year to Table 2. Prediction Accuracy: Ten-Folds Cross
Validated R2 for Stage 3 PM2.5 Predictions (Final Prediction Model
Including Locations Without AOD for 2000−2008)

a

yearly data set

CV R2

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 mean 2000−2008

0.79 0.83 0.85 0.82 0.80 0.80 0.83 0.83 0.78 0.81

CV R2

CV R2 spatial

temporal

0.76 0.80 0.72 0.80 0.75 0.83 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.78

0.79 0.83 0.85 0.82 0.81 0.80 0.84 0.83 0.78 0.82

Figure 3. Mean PM2.5 concentrations in each 10 × 10 km grid during the
entire modeling period (2000−2008) predicted by the AOD models.

Metropolitan area while ﬁgure 4b presents the city of New York.

RMSPEa 1.31 1.22 1.17 1.05 1.14 1.13 1.04 0.88 0.88 1.09

μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3 μg/m3

4. DISCUSSION In this paper we examined the relationship between PM2.5
   ground measurements and MODIS AOD data in the Mid Atlantic during the
   period 2000−2008. This study is an extension of our previous study22
   which we wanted to validate in a diﬀerent region with diﬀerent
   geographic and climatic characteristics. In addition, in the new
   model we introduce some signiﬁcant methodological improvements in a
   few key areas. First, by adding IPW into the ﬁrst stage calibration,
   we addressed the issue of selection bias. To account for the varying
   region characteristics (since the Mid-Atlantic area is a very large
   area) we divided the Mid-Atlantic into seven regions and incorporate
   them as nested regions within days in the model. This allowed us to
   better address the diﬀerent spatial-temporal individual
   characteristics of each separate region and resulted in better
   predictive performance. Also importantly, we improved on how the
   diﬀerent LU and MET (Meteorologic) variables were treated in the
   model by developing aggregate LU and MET variables (and all their
   interactions) combining all available LU/MET variables which allow us
   to include all available spatial and temporal predictors, and shrink
   them back toward their respective aggregates, instead of stepwise
   approaches. This helped eliminate the problems of only choosing a
   subset of available LU/MET terms (often decided subjectively by
   diﬀerent researchers) and also helped improve prediction performance.
   It is important to emphasize that the predictions of our models
   perform signiﬁcantly better than other prediction models which
   assumed that the relationship between PM2.5 and MODIS AOD data
   remains constant over time and much better than models using LU
   regression alone.16,36−38 The use of daily measurements of AOD (as
   opposed to other models) allows better assessment of space-time
   interactions than models that only have spatially resolved time
   invariant LU terms, since we have actual daily spatial measurements
   that can show diﬀerences in short-term particle concentrations
   between grid cells. This allows us to use the model to make
   predictions for studies of the acute eﬀects (short-term) of air
   pollution as well

Root of the mean squared prediction errors .

year variation 0.78−0.85), which is relatively high considering that
these were days with neither ground PM data nor satellite AOD data in
the grid cells being predicted. Again the spatial and temporal out of
sample results were very good (Table 3): For the temporal model the mean
out of sample R2 was 0.83 (year to year variation 0.79−0.85) and for the
spatial model the mean out of sample was 0.73 (year to year variation
0.68− 0.77). Both the Stage 1 and Stage 3 models yielded very small
predictions errors (RMSPE, root of the mean squared prediction errors):
1.09 and 1.38 μg/m3 respectively, indicating a strong model performance.
Figure 3 shows the spatial pattern of predicted PM2.5 concentrations
from the AOD models, averaged over the entire study period. Mean
predicted PM2.5 concentrations range from 6.48 to 20.80 μg/m3 showing a
good range of variability for our model. As expected, predicted PM2.5
concentrations are higher in urban areas such as New York, etc. compared
to rural areas such as in upper New York. Increased concentrations along
major interstate highways are also clear. By incorporating the local
stage (Stage 4) we see an increase of 1.9% across all years in mean
prediction performance (R2) of the model (compared to the without the
local PM stage). Figure 4 shows the diﬀerence of the estimated local
pollution (Stage 4) from the average PM2.5 concentrations at a very ﬁne
resolution (200 × 200m). Figure 4a presents the Baltimore 11918

dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921

Environmental Science & Technology

Article

Figure 4. Diﬀerence of the estimated local pollution from the average
overall annual PM2.5 concentrations at a very ﬁne resolution (200 × 200
m). Panel a presents the Baltimore Metropolitan area, whereas Panel b
presents the city of New York.

than a selective sample from urban locations as commonly done in current
epidemiological studies. Studies looking into the association between PM
2.5 and mortality, reduced birth weight etc. thus could greatly beneﬁt
from our models for both chronic and acute eﬀects. The main limitation
of the present study is the relatively coarse spatial resolution of 10 ×
10 km obtained through the MODIS satellite. However, as satellite remote
sensing evolves, higher spatial resolution data, for example, 1 × 1 km,
should become available which will further reduce exposure error. We
address this limitation somewhat by using our fourth stage model (the
local PM step for RGD) where we generate local predictions at individual
addresses. Another limitation is the lack of data on the composition of
AOD particles. Future analysis may allow us to develop exposure
estimation for speciﬁc PM components and other pollutants. In summary,
we have clearly demonstrated how AOD can be used reliably to predict
daily PM2.5 mass concentrations in the Mid-Atlantic area, validating our
previous model in another area. We have also shown how our model
improves further by adding methodological improvements, allowing us to
address some of the shortcoming of the ﬁrst iteration of the model.
Importantly, our model allows us to assess short-term and longterm human
exposures in order to investigate both the acute and eﬀects of ambient
particles, respectively.

as chronic (long-term) eﬀects, as well as for studies that attempt to
capture both eﬀects. Multiple studies in recent years have presented
models predicting PM2.5 including some that have established
quantitative relationships between satellite-derived AOD and
PM2.5.35,39−41 However, all these previous models present either
moderate predictive power, or lack detailed high spatial and temporal
resolution predictions across large domains. For example, Yanosky and
colleagues35 developed PM2.5 models which included smooth spatial and
regression terms of GIS and meteorological predictors. The predictive
performance was good (CV R2 0.77−0.69) and their model only generates
monthly predictions. Our model in comparison generates daily predictions
with a higher predicative performance (CV R2 0.79−0.84). It is important
to note that we noticed a small group of outliers in our data with
extremely high PM2.5 values corresponding to days with low AOD values.
Upon close investigation of these outliers we found that they were are
all centered around the major Mid-Atlantic Highway (the I-95) where the
relatively coarse 10 × 10 km grid cell for AOD cannot always capture
highly polluted days around the highway. The results of the cross
validation results without these outliers are much better (overall mean
out of sample R2 of 0.85 vs 0.82 with the outliers). On most days, our
model performs well in these locations, and we speculate these outlier
days are due to a low level inversion, which our model does not capture.
We will try to address this in the future by obtaining and incorporating
the height of the boundary layer data into our models. Our model could
be applied in various disciplines, particularly in epidemiology. Our
PM2.5 exposure model allows us to gain spatial resolution in the acute
eﬀects and an assessment of long-term eﬀects in the entire population,
rather

■

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

*E-mail: ekloog@hsph.harvard.edu. Notes

The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest. 11919

dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921

Environmental Science & Technology

■

Article

17) Gryparis, A.; Paciorek, C. J.; Zeka, A.; Schwartz, J.; Coull, B. A.
    Measurement error caused by spatial misalignment in environmental
    epidemiology. Biostatistics 2009, 10, 258−74.
18) Yanosky, J. D.; Paciorek, C. J.; Suh, H. H. Predicting chronic fine
    and coarse particulate exposures using spatiotemporal models for the
    Northeastern and Midwestern United States. Environ Health Perspect
    2009, 117, 522−9.
19) Engel-Cox, J. A.; Holloman, C. H.; Coutant, B. W.; Hoff, R. M.
    Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of MODIS satellite sensor
    data for regional and urban scale air quality. Atmos. Environ. 2004,
    38, 2495−2509.
20) Gupta, P.; Christopher, S. A.; Wang, J.; Gehrig, R.; Lee, Y. C.;
    Kumar, N. Satellite remote sensing of particulate matter and air
    quality assessment over global cities. Atmos. Environ. 2006, 40,
    5880−5892.
21) Koelemeijer, R. B. A.; Homan, C. D.; Matthijsen, J. Comparison of
    spatial and temporal variations of aerosol optical thickness and
    particulate matter over Europe. Atmos. Environ. 2006, 40, 5304−5315.
22) Kloog, I.; Koutrakis, P.; Coull, B. A.; Lee, H. J.; Schwartz, J.
    Assessing temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for
    epidemiological studies using satellite aerosol optical depth
    measurements. Atmos. Environ. 2011, 45, 6267−6275.
23) USCB United States Census Bureau of 2010. http://www.
    census.gov/geo/www/tiger/index.html.
24) King, M. D.; Kaufman, J. Remote sensing of cloud, aerosol, and water
    vapor properties from the moderate resolution imaging spectrometer
    (MODIS). IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 1992, 30.
25) Salomonson, V. V.; Barnes, W. L.; Maymon, P. W.; Montgomery, H. E.;
    Ostrow, H. MODIS-Advanced facility instrument for studies of the
    earth as a system. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 1989, 27,
    145−153.
26) Levy, R.; Remer, L.; Mattoo, S.; Vermote, E.; Kaufman, Y.
    Second-generation operational algorithm: Retrieval of aerosol
    properties over land from inversion of moderate resolution imaging
    spectroradiometer spectral reflectance. J. Geophys. Res 2007, 112,
    D.
27) Remer, L. A.; Kaufman, Y. J.; Tanré, D.; Mattoo, S.; Chu, D. A.;
    Martins, J. V.; Li, R.-R.; Ichoku, C.; Levy, R. C.; Kleidman, R. G.;
    Eck, T. F.; Vermote, E.; Holben, B. N. The MODIS aerosol algorithm,
    products, and validation. J. Atmos. Sci. 2005, 62, 947−973.
28) NASA MODIS- Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 2012.
29) Remer, L. A.; Kaufman, Y. J.; Tanré, D.; Mattoo, S.; Chu, D. A.;
    Martins, J. V.; Li, R.-R.; Ichoku, C.; Levy, R. C.; Kleidman, R. G.;
    Eck, T. F.; Vermote, E.; Holben, B. N. The MODIS aerosol algorithm,
    products, and validation. J. Atmos. Sci. 2005, 62, 947−973.
30) Homer, C.; Huang, C.; Yang, L.; Wylie, B.; Coan, M. Development of a
    2001 national landcover database for the United States. Photogramm.
    Eng. Remote Sens. 2004, 70, 829−840.
31) Maune, D. Digital Elevation Model Technologies and Applications: The
    DEM Users Manual; American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote
    Sensing: Maune, DF, 2007.
32) TIGER Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing
    system, 2006.
33) National Emissions Inventory; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency:
    Washington, DC, 2010.
34) NCDC The national climatic data center data inventories 2010.
35) Briggs, D. J.; de Hoogh, C.; Gulliver, J.; Wills, J.; Elliott, P.;
    Kingham, S.; Smallbone, K. A regression-based method for mapping
    traffic-related air pollution: Application and testing in four
    contrasting urban environments. Sci. Total Environ. 2000, 253,
    151−67.
36) Gryparis, A.; Paciorek, C. J.; Zeka, A.; Schwartz, J.; Coull, B. A.
    Measurement error caused by spatial misalignment in environmental
    epidemiology. Biostatistics 2009, 10, 258−74.
37) Ryan, P. H.; Lemasters, G. K.; Levin, L.; Burkle, J.; Biswas, P.;
    Hu, S.; Grinshpun, S.; Reponen, T. A land-use regression model for
    estimating microenvironmental diesel exposure given multiple
    addresses from birth through childhood. Sci. Total Environ. 2008,
    404, 139−47.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Supported by the Harvard Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) Center Grant USEPA grant RD 83479801 and NIEHS ES-000002. We also
thank Dr. William L Ridgway, Science Systems and Applications, Inc.
Climate and Radiation Branch, Code 613.2, NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771 and Steven J Melly, department of
environmental health, Harvard school of public health, Harvard
University.

■

REFERENCES

1)  Seinfeld, J. H.; Pandis, S. N. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics:
    From Air Pollution to Climate Change; Wiley-Interscience, 1998.
2)  Sheppard, L.; Levy, D.; Norris, G.; Larson, T. V.; Koenig, J. Q.
    Effects of ambient air pollution on nonelderly asthma hospital
    admissions in Seattle, Washington, 1987−1994. Epidemiology 1999,
    23−30.
3)  Schwartz, J.; Slater, D.; Larson, T. V.; Pierson, W. E.; Koenig, J.
    Q. Particulate air pollution and hospital emergency room visits for
    asthma in Seattle. Am. J. Respir. Crit.l Care Med. 1993, 147,
    826−831.
4)  Kloog, I.; Coull, B. A.; Zanobetti, A.; Koutrakis, P.; Schwartz, J.
    D. Acute and chronic effects of particles on hospital admissions in
    newEngland. PloS one 2012, 7, e34664.
5)  Wellenius, G. A.; Bateson, T. F.; Mittleman, M. A.; Schwartz, J.
    Particulate air pollution and the rate of hospitalization for
    congestive heart failure among medicare beneficiaries in Pittsburgh,
    Pennsylvania. Am J Epidemiol 2005, 161, 1030−6.
6)  Zanobetti, A.; Franklin, M.; Koutrakis, P.; Schwartz, J. Fine
    particulate air pollution and its components in association with
    causespecific emergency admissions. Environ Health 2009, 8, 58.
7)  Dockery, D.; Pope, C.; Xu, X.; Spengler, J.; Ware, J.; Fay, M.;
    Ferris, B.; Speizer, F. An association between air pollution and
    mortality in six US cities. N. Engl. J. Med. 1993, 329, 1753−1759.
8)  Franklin, M.; Zeka, A.; Schwartz, J. Association between PM2. 5 and
    all-cause and specific-cause mortality in 27 US communities. J.
    Exposure Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 2006, 17, 279−287.
9)  Pope, C., III; Burnett, R.; Thun, M.; Calle, E.; Krewski, D.; Ito,
    K.; Thurston, G. Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and
    longterm exposure to fine particulate air pollution. JAMA, J. Am.
    Med. Assoc. 2002, 287, 1132−1141.
10) Bonzini, M.; Carugno, M.; Grillo, P.; Mensi, C.; Bertazzi, P. A.;
    Pesatori, A. C. Impact of ambient air pollution on birth outcomes:
    Systematic review of the current evidences. La Medicina del lavoro
    2010, 101, 341.
11) Morello-Frosch, R.; Jesdale, B. M.; Sadd, J. L.; Pastor, M.; et al.
    Ambient air pollution exposure and full-term birth weight in
    California. Environ. Health 2010, 9, 44−44.
12) Kloog, I.; Melly, S. J.; Ridgway, W. L.; Coull, B. A.; Schwartz, J.
    D. Using New Satellite Based Exposure Methods to Study the
    Association Between Pregnancy PM 2.5 Exposure, Premature Birth And
    Birth Weight In Massachusetts. Environ. Health 2012.
13) Ritz, B.; Yu, F.; Chapa, G.; Fruin, S. Effect of air pollution on
    preterm birth among children born in Southern California between
    1989 and 1993. Epidemiology 2000, 11, 502.
14) Zeger, S. L.; Thomas, D.; Dominici, F.; Samet, J. M.; Schwartz, J.;
    Dockery, D.; Cohen, A. Exposure measurement error in time-series
    studies of air pollution: Concepts and consequences. Environ Health
    Perspect 2000, 108, 419−26.
15) Ross, Z.; English, P. B.; Scalf, R.; Gunier, R.; Smorodinsky, S.;
    Wall, S.; Jerrett, M. Nitrogen dioxide prediction in Southern
    California using land use regression modeling: Potential for
    environmental health analyses. J. Exposure Sci. Environ. Epidemiol.
    2006, 16, 106−14.
16) Aguilera, I.; Sunyer, J.; Fernández-Patier, R.; Hoek, G.;
    AguirreAlfaro, A.; Meliefste, K.; Bomboi-Mingarro, M. T.;
    Nieuwenhuijsen, M. J.; Herce-Garraleta, D.; Brunekreef, B.
    Estimation of outdoor NOx, NO2, and BTEX exposure in a cohort of
    pregnant women using land use regression modeling. Environ. Sci.
    Technol. 2007, 42, 815−821. 11920

dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921

Environmental Science & Technology

Article

38) Yanosky, J. D.; Paciorek, C. J.; Suh, H. H. Predicting chronic fine
    and coarse particulate exposures using spatio-temporal models for
    the northeastern and midwestern US. Environ. Health Perspect. 2008.
39) Yanosky, J. D.; Paciorek, C. J.; Schwartz, J.; Laden, F.; Puett, R.;
    Suh, H. H. Spatio-temporal modeling of chronic PM10 exposure for the
    Nurses' Health Study. Atmos. Environ. 2008, 42, 4047−4062.
40) Liu, Y.; Paciorek, C. J.; Koutrakis, P. Estimating regional spatial
    and temporal variability of PM2.5 concentrations using satellite
    data, meteorology, and land use information. Environ Health Perspect
    2009, 117, 886−892.
41) Lee, H. J.; Liu, Y.; Coull, B. A.; Schwartz, J.; Koutrakis, P. A
    novel calibration approach of MODIS AOD data to predict PM2.5
    concentrations. Atmos. Chem. Phys 2011, 11, 7991−8002.

11921

dx.doi.org/10.1021/es302673e | Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46,
11913−11921


