Detecting the Association between Children Health and Lead Exposure
Using Voronoi Polygon Rezoning Itai Klooga,b and Boris A. Portnova,1 a

Department of Natural Resources & Environmental Management, University
of Haifa, Mount Carmel 31905, Haifa, Israel; b Department of
Environmental Health - Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard
School of Public Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Dr West, Boston MA USA
02215

Abstract Townships or small census-designated statistical areas (SCA)
are often used in public health studies for the estimation of
residential exposure to environmental pollutants, which levels are
measured by air quality monitoring stations (AQMS) or estimated by soil
tests. However, since SCA's and actual exposure zones often mismatch
geographically, this exposure estimation approach is likely to lead to
exposure misclassification, known as “ecological bias” or “ecological
fallacy.” In this paper we used Voronoi polygons (VP) to rezone the
study area (based on soil test points) to test weather more homogenous
pollution exposure areas could be generated. A systematic sample of
3,922 schoolchildren including demographic and health data were then
retrieved from the Clalit Health Services (CHS) database for the years
2007-2009. Soil contamination data by Lead (Pb) were obtained from the
Israel Geological Survey, carried out between 1998 and 2007. Soil sample
points were superimposed upon the layer of Small Census Areas (SCAs) and
the average lead exposure for each SCA was calculated. Next, VPs were
formed around soil test points, with each polygon containing exactly one
lead soil measurement. Krigging and Inverse Distance Weighted (IDW)
interpolations were run, to compare their results with the results
obtained by SCA averaging and VP rezoning. The percent of children with
asthma, and their socio-demographic attributes were calculated. Both
Ordinary Least Square and Spatial Lag regressions were run to link
between lead exposure and the children's health status, controlled for
age, medical diagnosis of obesity (overweight), and welfare support to
the child's family. Model fits were consistently higher in the Voronoi
tessellation models compared to the SCA and interpolation models,
indicating that the VP method appeared to improve the models'
explanatory power. As we suggest, the proposed technique of VP rezoning
may be applicable to a wide range of empirical studies which use SCA's
that do not fit the “real” exposure zones and may thus cause exposure
misclassification biases and erroneous causeeffect estimates. Keywords:
Voronoi polygons; soil contamination; lead; GIS; exposure
misclassification; ecological bias; rezoning. 1. Introduction 1

Address for correspondence: Prof. Boris A. Portnov, Department of
Natural Resources & Environmental Management, Faculty of Social
Sciences, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, Israel 31905; tel:
972-4-8288532, fax: 972-4-8249971; email: portnov@nrem.haifa.ac.il.

Environmental studies often use census-designated statistical areas or
townships to estimate the average exposure levels of local residents to
various sources of air pollution and soil contamination . In most cases,
the ambient levels of environmental pollutants are recorded by air
quality monitoring stations

or measured by soil

contamination tests (Walling and He, 1999). However, census-designated
areas, in which study population resides, and networks of air quality
monitoring stations (AQMS) or/and soil test sites most often mismatch
geographically, with some small census areas (SCA) hosting several
environmental quality monitors, while others having none of them. This
situation may lead to exposure misclassification bias, due to the fact
that the same pollution exposure levels are effectively assigned to all
residents of relatively large territorial units, within which actual
exposure levels may vary considerably . Several empirical studies
attempted to address exposure misclassification bias by using various
interpolation techniques, such as splines, inverse distance weighted
method (IDW), kernel smoothing, or kriging . According to these
interpolation-based approaches, discrete observations are transformed
into continuous pollution surfaces, upon which residential locations of
the study subjects are superimposed, thus enabling to obtain individual
exposure estimates . However, these interpolation techniques have
several drawbacks, such as the mismatch of results obtained by different
interpolation tools and “error propagation” . The major cause of the
latter bias is attributed to the fact that any error (e.g., due to
faulty measurements), potentially occurring at original observation
points, propagates into all of the output layers of data created by
interpolation distorting them . Spatial tessellation, or a division of a
geographic plain into non-overlapping polygons, is another important
mapping technique, commonly used in geography.

2

There are various types of spatial tessellations, such as
administrative divisions, school districts, electoral districts, census
tracts, vegetation patterns, land uses, and land covers. Artificial
tessellations (i.e., tessellations based on regular nonoverlapping
shapes, not associated with any particular geographic features) are also
used in geography. Such tessellations include Voronoi diagrams (or
Voronoi polygons), Delaunay tessellations, lattices, and grids, and are
used to approximate catchment areas of urban facilities or to aggregate
a set of spatial features based on a common zonal system (Okabe et al.
2000). In the presented paper, we hypothesize that because small census
areas, used to assemble socio-economic attributes of subject
populations, and actual exposure zones often

mismatch

geographically,

this

''misalliance'

may

lead

to

exposure

misclassification. As we further hypothesize, using Voronoi polygons
(VPs) to rezone the study area can help to generate more homogenous
pollution exposure areas, thus minimizing exposure misclassification.
Voronoi (or sometimes called Thiessen) polygons (VP) are regions, which
interior consists of all points in the plane which are closer to a
particular point in space than to any other one (Voronoi et al. 1908;
Thiessen 1911; Weisstein 2009). As an illustration of the proposed
approach, we use results of soil tests for lead contamination, carried
out in the Greater Haifa Metropolitan Area (GHMA) by Israel Geological
Survey in 1998-2007 (unpublished data). Lead poisoning as a health issue
has been described as the “silent epidemic” (Nriagu 1988). According to
several epidemiological studies, young children are the most sensitive
group to lead exposure (Bellinger et al. 1987, Mushak et al. 1989,
Thornton et al. 1990). 2. Voronoi polygons (VPs) and their use in
empirical studies

3

VPs are created around a set of “reference” points on the plane, so
that all locations within a given region are closer to one of the
“reference” points than to any other point in the distribution . Thus,
for a set of points (a 1, a2,..., an) located on an Euclidian plane,
locations x belong to the polygon formed around point ai, if their
distances to point ai are equal or smaller than their distances to any
other reference point aj: (x - ai) ≤ (x - aj), where differences in the
parentheses stand for Euclidian distances between pairs of points. If
location x is equidistant from a pair of points, the location will lie
on the boundary of two adjacent polygons. Similarly, if x is equidistant
from three or more points, it will form a common vertex of three or more
adjacent polygons. The resulting set of polygons, defined in the above
manner, forms a contiguous, nonoverlapping tessellation which is unique
for any given set of input points . In previous empirical studies, VPs
were primarily used in computer graphics and computer simulations, in
geophysics, and meteorology . Thus, Benenson and Omer (2003) used the
Voronoi diagram (VD) approach for constructing continuous building
coverage, in which VP were formed around individual buildings and
included the buildings themselves and surrounding areas, forming a net
visually similar to residential parcellation. In a separate study used
VP to create a continuous residential parcellation so as to simulate the
dynamics of ethnic distribution in the Jaffa area of the city of Tel
Aviv during the period 1955 -1995, using the “agent-based” modeling
approach. Hwang and colleagues

conducted a health survey to assess the impact of

different pathways of human exposure resulting from the off-site
migration of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) contamination in the Mohawk
Indian reservation in

4

the U.S.A. Seven methods were examined to map surface soil PCB
concentrations, including the VP method. The results indicated that all
methods performed well in deriving a surface soil PCB concentration
estimate, although the inverse nearest neighbor approach resulted in the
smallest average estimated error. In another study investigated the
degree of uncertainty associated with the use of spatial exposure models
for air pollution assessment. They presented a modeling framework for
assessing the exposure model performance and investigated the role of
spatial autocorrelation for the estimation of health effects. The study
used data from the Southern California Children's Health Survey. The
adjacency based weight matrices were created using VPs, in which each
polygon contained exactly one individual. The analysis suggested that
the inclusion of residual spatial error terms improved the prediction of
adverse health effects and that residual spatial errors might be used as
a diagnostic for comparing models' performances. Okabe et al. (2000)
published a comprehensive review of approaches to the computation of
Voronoi diagrams and their empirical applications in different fields of
science, including astronomy, metallurgy, ecology, economy and physical
planning. One of potential VD applications discussed in the book was a
co-investigation of spatial patterns of two layers of point-like objects
(such as e.g., railway stations and bookstores), aimed at determining
whether their spatial patterns are mutually dependent or independent of
each other. The proposed algorithm involved a two-stage analysis: first,
VPs were formed around one group of objects (e.g., railway stations)
and, next, nearest neighbor distances for the second group of features
(e.g., book stores), falling into individual VPs, were formed around the
first group of objects and analyzed.

5

Although several empirical studies carried out to date were based on
the VP technique, it should be noted, however, that in most of these
studies, VPs were mainly used for mapping, visualization of spatial
patterns, and for the formation of nonoverlapping ‘trade areas' or so
called ‘subsistence zones.' There have also been several attempts to use
the VP technique for the locational optimization of public facilities
and for the comparison of bivariate distributions of different
geographically referenced objects (Hwang et al, 1999; Bohm et al, 2000;
Okabe et al. 2000). However, to the best of our knowledge, no studies
have been conducted yet using VPs in multivariate analysis studies. In
such studies there is often a need to use a multivariate statistical
tools, to investigate the association between several factors while
taking into account potential confounders that may affect it. Hence, in
the following analysis, we shall attempt to illustrate the use of VPs
for redefining population exposure estimates for a subsequent
multivariate analysis, in which the association between air pollution
exposure estimates and asthma morbidity will be controlled by the
socio-economic status of the study population and its health attributes.
3. Research method 3.1 Study population The study population consisted
of a systematic sample of 3,922 schoolchildren of the 1st through 8th
grade (6-14 years old) residing in different residential communities of
the Greater Haifa Metropolitan Area (GHMA) carried out in 2008-2009 by
the Clalit Health Services (CHS). GHMA is the main industrial region of
Israel, formed by seven cities, including the city of Haifa (266,000
residents), Qiryat Tivon (13,100 residents), Nesher (21,300 residents),
Qiryat Ata (49,600 residents), Qiryat Motzkin (39,600 residents), Qiryat
Bialik (36,400 residents) and Qiryat Yam (37,000 6

residents). Demographic data (the date of birth, and gender) and data
on the children's health status (viz., the latest measurement of weight
and height; the presence of acute and chronic diseases including Asthma)
were retrieved from the CHS computerized database. [CHS is the largest
health care provider in Israel. Health care coverage in Israel is
mandatory and all study participants had similar health insurance
coverage and similar access to health services]. The locations of the
children's homes were geo-coded and mapped using the ArcGIS 9.xTM
software. Geocoding is the process of generating geographic coordinates
(latitude and longitude) from street addresses, which enables individual
locations to be mapped as GIS layers (ESRI 2007). The residential
locations of children covered by the survey are shown as small black
dots on Fig. 1. <<< Figure 1 about here >> 3.2 Soil contamination data
Soil contamination data by lead (Pb) were obtained from the Israel
Geological Survey, carried out in 1998-2007 (unpublished data). There
were 45 soil sample points spread fairly evenly across the entire area
of GHMA (see Fig. 2) with lead contamination ranging from 0 (i.e., below
detection limits) to 960 mg/kg. Although the number of soil test sites
used in the analysis (45) was relatively small, this number is generally
considered to be sufficient for robust spatial interpolation (Anderson
2001). [In the analysis default kriging settings (such as sill/nugget
ratios) of the ArcGIS 9.x TM software were used]. 3.3 Study phases The
study was carried out in several phases. During the first phase of the
analysis, soil sample points were superimposed upon the layer of SCAs,
into which the entire study

7

are is divided (see Fig. 1), and the average lead exposure for each SCA
was calculated. The task was performed by averaging the lead exposure
values of all lead measurements falling into a given SCA. Next, VPs were
formed around soil test points, with each polygon containing exactly one
lead soil measurement point (see Fig. 2). At the next stage of the
analysis, krigging and Inverse Distance Weighted (IDW) interpolations
were run, to compare their results with the results obtained by SCA
averaging and VP rezoning. Interpolations was performed according to the
individual exposure estimation approach developed in previous studies .
During the next phase of the analysis, individual values of lead tests
were transformed in continuous surfaces using krigging and IDW
interpolation approaches. Next, the locations of homes of children
covered by the survey were superimposed upon these surfaces and
individual exposure of each child in the study cohort to lead
contamination was estimated. The analysis was performed using the
“spatial loin” tool in the ArcGIS 9.xTM software . The obtained values
of lead exposure were then averaged for each SCA based on individual
exposure estimates of all the children residing in each particular SCA.
During the last phase of the analysis, the percent of children with
asthma, and their socio-demographic attributes were calculated, first,
for the SCAs (Fig. 1), and then for the VPs (Fig. 2). Both tasks were
also performed using the “spatial join” tool of the ArcGIS 9.xTM
software (ibid.). Descriptive statistics of the research variables, for
SCAs and Voronoi grids, are reported in Appendices 1&2, respectively.
<<< Figure 2 about here >>> 3.5 Statistical analysis To identify and
measure the significance of factors affecting the development of the 8

children's asthma, Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) models were initially
used. During the analysis multicollinearity, and normality, were tested
and their results were found satisfactory (Tolerance>0.85). The percent
of children with asthma, for either SCA or VPs, was used in the analysis
as the dependent variable. In addition to lead exposure, the following
factors were included into the multivariate regression analysis as
explanatory variables for asthma prevalence: age, medical diagnosis of
obesity (overweight), and welfare support to the child's family
(presence of support for a poor family or lack thereof). The confounding
role of these variables has been outlined by several previous studies
(Kosti and Panagiotakos 2006; Smith et al. 2002; Wang and Lobstein
2006). The values of the variables were calculated for either SCAs or
Voronoi divisions as percent of children with a given attribute (e.g.,
welfare support or obesity), apart from lead exposure and age which were
calculated as averages. During the initial stage, the analysis was
performed using the following linear model: Percent of children with
asthma = B0 (constant) + B1* (lead exposure) + B2/(age) +B3/(obesity) +
B4*(low income status) +ε (random error term), where B0,..., B4 are
regression coefficients. At the second stage of the analysis, Spatial
Lag (SL) regressions were run, to account for spatial dependency of
regression residuals. The analysis was performed using the GeoDA 0.9©
software . 4. Results Tables 1-3 report factors affecting the percent of
children diagnosed with asthma and calculated using SCA averaging (Table
1), IDW and krigging interpolations (Table 2), and VP rezoning (Table
3). For SCA averaging and VP rezoning, two types of 9

regression models - OLS and SL regressions -- are also reported. [Since
SL models obtained for interpolation-based estimates are nearly
identical to the results of OLS models, SL models are not reported in
Table 2, for brevity's sake]. << Tables 1-3 about here >> As Table 1
shows models, obtained by simple averaging of lead tests for SCAs (Table
1) and by interpolation (Table 2) provide rather poor fits (R2 =0.079
-0.081, see Table 1 and R2 =0.066 - 0.077; Table 2). Notably, model fits
are higher in VP models (R2=0.251-0.270; Table 3), indicating that the
latter models appear to improve the models' explanatory power, at least
compared to the former model runs (see Table 12). Characteristically, in
the VP-based models, the lead exposure variable emerged as statistically
significant and exhibits the expected sign, that is, it is positively
associated with the percent of asthmatic children (B=0.061, P<0.05; see
Table 3), while in both SCA averaged and interpolation-based models
(Tables 1-2), the sign of this association is unreasonably negative,
implying that lead exposure may have a protective effect on children. 5.
Discussion Although the use of VP in environmental and geographic
research is not new , in previous studies this technique was used mainly
for visualization purposes, data comparison, and nearest neighbor
queries. However, in empirical studies, there is often a need to analyze
the association between several geographically referenced objects while
taking into account potential confounders which may affect it. Hence, in
the present analysis, we attempted to illustrate the use of VPs for a
multivariate analysis, in which the association between soil pollution
exposure estimates and asthma morbidity was controlled for
socio-economic status of the study population 10

and its health attributes. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed
empirical approach of using VPs for generating relatively homogeneous
exposure areas for a multivariate statistical analysis is novel, and
helps to minimize potential biases arising from exposure
misclassification. The potential usefulness of the proposed approach may
be attributed to the fact that in empirical environmental research,
there is often a need to combine and analyze data obtained for different
resolution levels: group-level data derived from surveys, data obtained
from individuals, mixed data from both surveys and individuals, and data
for statistical areas which boundaries are established for purposes
other than health investigations . While population level data obtained
from e.g., census designated statistical areas, are most readily
available, they have several disadvantages. Thus, for instance, these
population level data normally provide the researcher with a limited
number of variables which rarely go beyond basic demographic attributes
and aggregated income counts. Census data do not also include exposure
estimates, which normally come from soil tests, measurements provided by
air quality monitoring stations (AQMS) or estimated by air dispersion
modeling. Since census designated areas, on the one hand, and networks
of soil samples and monitoring stations do not overlap, the same
pollution levels are effectively assigned to all residents of relatively
large territorial divisions, within which actual exposure levels may
vary considerably. This is likely to lead to an exposure
misclassification bias and erroneous estimates of exposure-health effect
associations. The use of various interpolation techniques, such as
splines, inverse distance weighted method (IDW), kernel smoothing, or
kriging is one possibility to address this potential bias . However,
these interpolation techniques have several drawbacks,

11

such as a mismatch of results obtained by different interpolation tools
and “error propagation” . The analytical approach proposed and tested in
the present study is relatively simple. In the first step of the
analysis, VPs is created around soil sample points. Next, population
data are superimposed upon the VPs and averages are computed for each
VPs, thus enabling a subsequent multivariate analysis of potential
association between lead contamination and population health attributes.
While a commonly used analytical approach based on census designated
areas for exposure assessment VPs polygons, formed around a relatively
dense net of soil sample points, are less likely to cause such an
exposure misclassification bias thus leading to more accurate
assessments of environmental health effects, as compared to SCA-based
exposure estimation or interpolation based methods. The present analysis
confirms this assumption. While the SCA and interpolation based models
did not detect a correct association between lead contamination and
children health, such an association was detected in the VP models. This
outcome highlights the advantages of using the Voronoi rezoning
technique, as opposed to traditional SCA zoning tools. It is also to be
noted, however, that the use of the VPs technique requires a large
amount of observation points (e.g. soil sample points or a dense net of
AQMS), around which VPs can be formed. An alternative may be using air
pollution grids generated by air dispersion modeling (LAKES 2005; Wang
et al. 2006), which may serve as proxies for environmental pollutants
dispersed with the air and accumulated in soil around the study cohort's
residences.

6. Conclusion

12

As the present study demonstrates, model fits were consistently higher
in the Voronoi tessellation models than in the SCA and interpolation
models, indicating that, in line with our initial research hypothesis,
the VP method does appears to improve the multivariate models'
explanatory power. As we suggest, the proposed technique of VP rezoning
may be applicable to a wide range of empirical studies which use SCA's
that do not fit the “real” exposure zones and may thus cause exposure
mis-classification biases and erroneous cause-effect estimates.
Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Dr. Moshe Shirav-Schwartz of
the Geological Survey of Israel and to Dr. Orit Cohen-Kastel of the
Clalit Health Services for providing data for this research.

6. References Aherns, W. and I. Pigeot (2004). Handbook of Epidemiology.
   Springer. Anderson, S. (2001). An evaluation of spatial interpolation
   methods on air temperature in Phoenix, AZ. Dep. of geography, Arizona
   State University. Anselin, L., I. Syabri and Y. Kho (2005). " GeoDa :
   An Introduction to Spatial Data Analysis." Geographical Analysis
   38(1): 5-22. Benenson, I. and I. Omer (2003). "High-resolution Census
   data: a simple way to make them useful." Data Science Journal 2(0):
   117-127. Benenson, I., I. Omer and E. Hatna (2002). "Entity-based
   modeling of urban residential dynamics: the case of Yaffo, Tel Aviv."
   Environment and Planning B 29(4): 491-512.

13

Bohm, G., P. Galuppo and A. Vesnaver (2000). "3D adaptive tomography
using Delaunay triangles and Voronoi polygons." Geophysical Prospecting
48(4): 723-744. Boots, B. (1980). "Weighting thiessen polygons."
Economic Geography 56(3): 248259. Braun, J. and M. Sambridge (1995). "A
numerical method for solving partial differential equations on highly
irregular evolving grids." Nature 376(6542): 655-660. Dubnov, J., M.
Barchana, S. Rishpon, A. Leventhal, I. Segal, R. Carel and B. A. Portnov
(2007). "Estimating the effect of air pollution from a coal-fired power
station on the development of children's pulmonary function." Environ
Res 103(1): 87-98. ESRI (2007). ARCGIS, ESRI. Gotway, C. and L. J. Young
(2002). " Combining incompatible spatial data." Journal of the American
Statistical Association 97 (48): 632-647. Greenland, S. and H.
Morgenstern (1989). "Ecological bias, confounding, and effect
modification." Int J Epidemiol 18 (1): 269- 274. Heuvelink, G. (1998).
Error propagation in environmental modelling with GIS, CRC Press. Hwang,
S., E. Fitzgerald, M. Cayo, B. Yang, A. Tarbell and A. Jacobs (1999).
"Assessing Environmental Exposure to PCBs among Mohawks at Akwesasne
through the Use of Geostatistical Methods* 1." Environmental research
80(2): S189-S199. Kloog, I., A. Haim and B. A. Portnov (2009). "Using
kernel density function as an urban analysis tool: Investigating the
association between nightlight exposure

14

and the incidence of breast cancer in Haifa, Israel." Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems 33(1): 55-63. Ledoux, H. and C. Gold
(2007). "Simultaneous storage of primal and dual threedimensional
subdivisions." Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 31(4): 393-408.
Minami, M. and ESRI (2000). Using ArcMap: GIS. Redlands, California,
ESRI. Molitor, J., M. Jerrett, C. Chang, N. Molitor, J. Gauderman, K.
Berhane, R. McConnell, F. Lurmann, J. Wu and A. Winer (2007). "Assessing
uncertainty in spatial exposure models for air pollution health effects
assessment." Environmental Health Perspectives 115(8): 1147. Mostafavi,
M., C. Gold and M. Dakowicz (2003). "Delete and insert operations in
Voronoi/Delaunay methods and applications* 1." Computers & Geosciences
29(4): 523-530. Portnov, B., J. Dubnov and M. Barchana (2009). "Studying
the association between air pollution and lung cancer incidence in a
large metropolitan area using a kernel density function." Socio-Economic
Planning Sciences 43(3): 141-150. Portnov, B. A., J. Dubnov and M.
Barchana (2007). "On ecological fallacy, assessment errors stemming from
misguided variable selection, and the effect of aggregation on the
outcome of epidemiological study." Journal of Exposure Science and
Environmental Epidemiology 17(1): 106-121. Ritz, B., F. Yu, S. Fruin, G.
Chapa, G. Shaw and J. Harris (2002). "Ambient air pollution and risk of
birth defects in Southern California." American journal of epidemiology
155(1): 17. Thiessen, A. (1911). "Precipitation averages for large
areas." Monthly weather review 39(7): 1082-1089.

15

Voronoi, G. and Z. Reine (1908). "For the origin of the concept of
Voronoi polyhedra." Angew Math 134: 198. Wakefield, J. and G. Shaddick
(2006). "Health-exposure modeling and the ecological fallacy."
Biostatistics 7(3): 438. Weisstein, W. E., Ed. (2009). Voronoi Polygon
MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource. Yogev-Baggio, T., H. Bibi, J. Dubnov,
K. Or-Hen, R. Carel and B. Portnov (2010). "Who is affected more by air
pollution--Sick or healthy? Some evidence from a health survey of
schoolchildren living in the vicinity of a coal-fired power plant in
Northern Israel." Health & Place 16(2): 399-408.

16

TABLE 1 Factors affecting the percent of children with asthma
(geographic resolution - Small Census Areas (SCA); methods: Ordinary
Least Squares (OLS) and Spatial Lag (SL) regressions) Variable
(Constant) Lead exposure Obesity Income status Age Number of obs. b R2 F
Log likelihood Moran's I c Rhod

Model 1-OLSa Ba -10.085 (-0.565) -0.008 (-1.402) 0.067 (0.405) 0.127
(1.578) 2.370 (1.347) 72 0.079 1.430

Model 2-SLa Ba -11.057 (-0.642) -0.007 (-1.338) 0.064 (0.405) 0.122
(1.567) 2.360 (1.388) 72 0.081 -233.21

1.110 0.075

Note: a Regression coefficient and t-statistics in the parentheses; b
number of valid observations listwise; c Moran's I spatial lag
coefficient. d spatial lag coefficient. /indicates a 0.1 significance
level; *indicates a 0.05 significance level; */ indicates a 0.01
significance level.

17

TABLE 2 Factors affecting the percent of children with asthma
calculated using interpolation based techniques - IDW and Krigging
(geographic resolution - SCAs; method -OLS) Variable (Constant) Lead
exposure Obesity Income status Age Number of obs. b R2 F

Model 3- Krigginga Ba -12.474 (-0.695) -0.021 (-1.111) 0.045 (0.254)
0.082 (1.061) 2.700 (1.527) 72 0.077 1.222

Model 4- IDWa Ba -11.082 (-0.618) -0.012 (-1.027) 0.045 (0.267) 0.110
(1.392) 2.485 (1.405) 72 0.066 1.190

Note: a Regression coefficient and t-statistics in the parentheses; b
number of valid observations list-wise; c Moran's I spatial lag
coefficient. d spatial lag coefficient. /indicates a 0.1 significance
level; *indicates a 0.05 significance level; */ indicates a 0.01
significance level. .

TABLE 3 Factors affecting the percent of children with asthma
(geographic resolution -- Voronoi polygons; methods: Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) and Spatial Lag (SL) regressions) Variable (Constant) Lead
exposure Obesity Income status Age Number of obs. b R2 F Log likelihood
Moran's I c Rhod

Model 1-OLSa Ba -49.756* (-2.626) 0.061 * (2.367) 0.233 (0. 785) -0.121
(-0.903) 5.783** (3.135) 45 0.268 3.655*

Model 2-SLa Ba -49.694 */ (-2.783) 0.063/* (2.543) 0.220 (0.790) -0.110
(-0.873) 5.836*** (3.358) 45 0.270 -147.93

0.461 -0.071

a

Note: Regression coefficient and t-statistics in the parentheses; b
number of valid observations list-wise; c Moran's I spatial lag
coefficient. d spatial lag coefficient. /indicates a 0.1 significance
level; *indicates a 0.05 significance level; */ indicates a 0.01
significance level.

19

APPENDIX 1 Descriptive statistics of the research variables for the SCA
resolution level * Variable

Measurement unit Minimum Maximum Mean Std. Deviation Dependent variable
Asthmatic children % 0.000 28.070 14.572 6.483 Explanatory variables
Lead contamination ppm 10 493 109.430 144.693 Obesity diagnosis % 0.000
23.810 4.249 4.672 Low income status % 0.000 50.000 10.429 10.017
Average age years 8.833 11.333 10.082 0.435 *Total number of cases --
72.

20

APPENDIX 2 Descriptive statistics of the research variables for the
Voronoi resolution level Variable

-  

Measurement unit Minimum Maximum Mean Std. Deviation Dependent variable
Asthmatic children % 0.00 37.500 13.056 7.667 Explanatory variables Lead
contamination ppm 16.166 173.400 70.318 41.656 Obesity diagnosis % 0.000
16.670 3.380 4.125 Low income status % 0.000 50.000 8.471 9.397 Average
age years 8.444 11.538 10.165 0.592 *Total number of cases -- 45.

21

Figure 1: Map of the study area showing the location of homes of
children covered by the urvey, lead sampling points, and SCA divisions.

Figure 2: Voronoi polygon rezoning of the study area into exposure zones
formed around soil measurement points

22


