Kloog et al. Environmental Health 2012, 11:40
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/11/1/40

RESEARCH

Open Access

Using new satellite based exposure methods to study the association
between pregnancy pm2.5 exposure, premature birth and birth weight in
Massachusetts Itai Kloog1*, Steven J Melly1, William L Ridgway2, Brent A
Coull3 and Joel Schwartz1

Abstract Background: Adverse birth outcomes such as low birth weight and
premature birth have been previously linked with exposure to ambient air
pollution. Most studies relied on a limited number of monitors in the
region of interest, which can introduce exposure error or restrict the
analysis to persons living near a monitor, which reduces sample size and
generalizability and may create selection bias. Methods: We evaluated
the relationship between premature birth and birth weight with exposure
to ambient particulate matter (PM2.5) levels during pregnancy in
Massachusetts for a 9-year period (2000--2008). Building on a novel
method we developed for predicting daily PM2.5 at the spatial resolution
of a 10x10km grid across New-England, we estimated the average exposure
during 30 and 90 days prior to birth as well as the full pregnancy
period for each mother. We used linear and logistic mixed models to
estimate the association between PM2.5 exposure and birth weight (among
full term births) and PM2.5 exposure and preterm birth adjusting for
infant sex, maternal age, maternal race, mean income, maternal education
level, prenatal care, gestational age, maternal smoking, percent of open
space near mothers residence, average traffic density and mothers
health. Results: Birth weight was negatively associated with PM2.5
across all tested periods. For example, a 10 μg/m3 increase of PM2.5
exposure during the entire pregnancy was significantly associated with a
decrease of 13.80 g [95% confidence interval (CI) = −21.10, -6.05] in
birth weight after controlling for other factors, including traffic
exposure. The odds ratio for a premature birth was 1.06 (95% confidence
interval (CI) = 1.01--1.13) for each 10 μg/m3 increase of PM2.5 exposure
during the entire pregnancy period. Conclusions: The presented study
suggests that exposure to PM2.5 during the last month of pregnancy
contributes to risks for lower birth weight and preterm birth in
infants. Keywords: Air pollution, Birth weight, Preterm birth, Aerosol
optical depth, Epidemiology, PM2.5

Background Recent epidemiological studies have established the
association between maternal exposure to air pollution and adverse
pregnancy outcomes [1-10]. The studies have shown that exposure to air
pollution may elevate the risk of adverse birth outcomes, including
infant death [11],low * Correspondence: ekloog@ hsph.harvard.edu 1
Department of Environmental Health - Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Dr
West, Boston, MA 02215, USA Full list of author information is available
at the end of the article

birth weight (LBW) [4,12,13] , preterm delivery [8], and small body size
for gestational age [14]. Low or reduced birth weight (LBW) is an
important predictor of children's health and is associated with higher
risk of infant and childhood mortality [15] and coronary heart disease
[16]. Preterm birth (PTB) is an indicator of prenatal disturbances of
the placenta and of fetal development. Like LBW, prematurity is an
important predictor of infant mortality, childhood morbidity, and
possibly adult morbidity [8].

© 2012 Kloog et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original work is properly cited.

Kloog et al. Environmental Health 2012, 11:40
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/11/1/40

Interpretations of studies are complicated since LBW (birth weight
smaller than 2500 g) represents a heterogeneous group of outcomes with
different pathogenic mechanisms. Some infants have LBW as a result of
PTB (less than 37 completed weeks of gestation at delivery), while
others are a result of intrauterine growth restrictionIUGR (birth weight
less than that expected for a given gestational age). Some maternal
prenatal determinants may be associated with an increased risk of LBW
through effects on the length of gestation alone (e.g., premature
rupture of the membranes, placenta abruption), others through effects on
intrauterine fetal growth alone (e.g., maternal weight gain,
hypertension), and some possibly through effects on both PTB and IUGR
(e.g., maternal cigarette smoking). Where air pollution falls in this
spectrum is not fully resolved. Previous studies examining the
association of LBW/PTB and PM2.5 have typically used available monitors
in the study area. PM2.5 concentrations vary spatially within the study
domain and thus using only available monitors introduces exposure error
and likely biases the effect estimates downward [17]. Furthermore, lack
of spatially resolved daily PM2.5 concentration data restricts these
studies to populations surrounding monitoring sites, which may not be
representative of the population as a whole. Land use regressions
provide estimates of geographically resolved exposures at individual
residences, but are usually not temporally resolved enough [18,19] to
look at effects of exposures in the last 30 days of pregnancy, when a
substantial weight gain occurs. We developed a method to predict daily
temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 across New-England for the years
2000--2008 [20,21]. These predictions, which are based on land use
regression plus a daily calibration of PM2.5 ground measurements and
MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) satellite aerosol
optical depth (AOD), allow us to predict daily PM2.5 concentration
levels at the resolution of a 10x10 km spatial grid. Recently, this
model has been slightly updated to include nested regions in the yearly
models and weights to account for non-random missingness in AOD. The new
“out of sample” R2 of the prediction model is 0.85. Importantly, this R2
is for daily observations, rather than monthly or yearly values. By
averaging our estimated daily exposures at each location we can
generated long term exposures. This enables us to study both the short
term and long term effects of ambient particles, respectively. In the
presented study, we make use of these new PM2.5 prediction data to study
the association between long (exposure during the whole birth period and
last trimester) and short term PM2.5 exposure (exposure during the last
month of pregnancy) and birth weight and premature birth in eastern
Massachusetts between the years 2000--2008. The resulting analyses
include birth weight outcomes from

Page 2 of 8

all births in the study region regardless of how close each participant
lives to a PM2.5 monitor.

Methods Study domain and population

The spatial domain of our study included the state of Massachusetts
(Figure 1). The study population included all singleton live births in
Massachusetts from the Massachusetts Birth Registry for the period of
January 1, 2000 to December 31, 2008. The residential address of each
mother at time of birth was geocoded by a private firm -- Teleatlas, an
industry leading geocoding company commonly used in academic studies
[22]. In addition, we manually checked a random sample of geocoded
addresses for accuracy by using ESRI ArcGIS© software StreetMap data
[23]. Geocoding was done by matching the street address, city, state,
and ZIP code to street network data derived from US census bureau TIGER
(Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing system)
dataset [24], and assigning to this street address latitude and
longitude coordinates. The study and the use of birth data was approved
by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and the human subjects
committee of the Harvard School of Public Health. The analysis was
restricted to singleton births, and there were 634,244 such births in
the study. The number of infants with gestational age of 37 weeks or
greater was 572,272. Exposure data

For exposure data we used two different indicators: predicted 10 x 10 km
PM2.5 and residence-specific cumulative traffic density. We describe
each metric in more detail below. PM2.5 exposure - PM2.5 exposure data
were generated by the previously mentioned PM2.5 prediction model [20].
In these prediction models we used mixed models with random slopes for
day to calibrate satellite AOD data at the resolution of a 10x10 km
spatial grid (2000--2008) across New England with monitored PM2.5
measurements. We then used a generalized additive mixed model with
spatial smoothing to estimate PM2.5 in location-day pairs with missing
AOD, using regional measured PM2.5, AOD values in neighboring cells, and
land use. ”Out-of-sample” tenfold cross-validation was used to quantify
the accuracy of our predictions. For days with available AOD data we
found high “out-of-sample” R2 (mean “out-of-sample” R2 = 0.87). For days
without AOD values, our model performance was also excellent (mean
“out-of-sample” R2 = 0.85). To estimate PM2.5 exposure, each mother's
residence at the time of delivery was linked to one 10X10km grid point
(see Figure 1). Exposure was calculated by averaging daily PM2.5
concentrations over the 30 days prior to the delivery date, 90 days
prior to the delivery date and the full pregnancy period.

Kloog et al. Environmental Health 2012, 11:40
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/11/1/40

Page 3 of 8

Figure 1 Map of the study area showing the residential location of a
subset of mothers over a sample PM2.5 (μg/m3) 10x10km pollution grid for
a sample day (01/07/2001).

Cumulative traffic density- Local traffic emissions are a small part of
total PM2.5 in Boston (for example in our Massachusetts data, black
carbon consists of only 10% of total PM). This allows us to separately
consider traffic pollution and PM2.5. Road data were obtained from the
Massachusetts department of transportation (MassDOT), which conducts
traffic counts on selected roads and provided estimates of 2002 traffic
on other roads. This dataset included average daily traffic (ADT) as an
attribute. The data included automatic and estimated counts based on
periodic counts on all other major roads. A 200 m by 200 m grid was
carefully constructed to allow 100 m buffers around each grid center
point without overlap. These buffers covered the seven counties as
previously done in several studies [10]. Normalized cumulative ADT
(CADT) was calculated for all road segments within 100 meters around
each grid point as: CADT = Σ (ADT *road segment length), and that value
was assigned to the respective grid point. Birth addresses were then
assigned an average of the estimates of the four grid points around it,
using bilinear interpolation.

Covariates

Covariates were chosen based on previous literature on the potential
risk factors associated with low birth weight [9,10] and include both
individual and contextual covariates: Land use for recreation and
conservation- Land use for recreation and conservation (open space) was
downloaded from the office of geographic information Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, information technology division MassGIS [25]. The subset
of the open space designated for recreation and conservation was
intersected with 2000 Census tract boundaries (also downloaded from
MassGIS) using ArcGIS© 9.3. The percent of each census tract that was
open space was then calculated and assigned to birth addresses belonging
to that tract. Socioeconomic indicators- Individual level variables were
obtained from the birth registry. Such information included the mother's
race, mother's years of education, and the Kotelchuck index of adequacy
of prenatal care utilization (APNCU). APNCU is based on the number and
the time of start of mother's prenatal visits [26] was recorded into:
inadequate (<50 percent of expected

Kloog et al. Environmental Health 2012, 11:40
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/11/1/40

visits used); intermediate (50--79 percent); appropriate (80--109
percent); and appropriate plus (≥110 percent). Education of the mother
was categorized as: no high school (≤ 12 years of educational
attainment), some high school (≤ 12 years of educational attainment);
some college (13--15 years); and college or postgraduate (≥ 16 years).
Median income- We obtained data from the United States Census Bureau of
2000 on median household income [27] for each census tract in the study
area, and assigned these to births whose address belonged to that tract.
Additionally, individual-level covariates maternal age, gestational age,
amount of cigarettes smoked during and before pregnancy, chronic
conditions of mother or conditions of pregnancy (lung disease,
hypertension, gestational diabetes and non-gestational diabetes),
previous occurrence of a preterm birth, whether the mother ever had a
previous infant weighing 4000 grams or more and gender of infant were
all obtained through the Massachusetts Birth Registry. Statistical
methods

To identify and measure the significance of factors affecting birth
weight two models were performed: a linear mixed regression models using
birth weight (among full term births) as the outcome and a logistic
mixed regression models using pre term/full term birth as the outcome
[9,28]. All modeling was done in R statistical software. Predictors
included mean PM2.5 exposure prior to delivery (30, 90 and 270 days
prior to the delivery date), cigarette use previous to pregnancy,
cigarette use during pregnancy, median income, APNCU, cumulative traffic
density, percent of open spaces, age of mother, gestational age, chronic
conditions of mother or conditions of pregnancy (lung disease,
hypertension, gestational diabetes or non-gestational diabetes),
previous preterm births, previous infant weighting 4000 grams and gender
of infant. A random intercept for census tract was used to capture
unmeasured similarities in persons in the same neighborhood.
Specifically we fit the models:   BWij ¼ α þ uj þ β1 PMi þ β2i X2i þ
β3i X31 . . .   þeij uj eN½0; su 2 ;ðmodel 1Þ   Logit ðPr BWij ¼
1jXÞ ¼ α þ uj þ β1 PMi þ β2i X2i   þβ3i X31 . . . þ eij uj eN½0; su 2
;ðmodel 2Þ where BWij (or Logit(Pr BWij = 1|X) ) is the response (birth
weight or full/pre term) for the ith subject in census tract j, α and uj
are the fixed and random (tract specific) intercepts, respectively, PMi,
X1i, etc. denote the set of covariates of interest used in the model,
eij is the error term and finally, σu 2 iis the variance of the tract
random effects, and ejj ~ N[0,σe 2],. During the analysis,

Page 4 of 8

multicollinearity and normality were evaluated, and no issues were
uncovered (tolerance > 0.4).

Results Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1. Of the 634,844
live full term births included in our analyses, 49.36% of the births
were male, 71.70% were white, only 7.50% had maternal age below 20 and
21.16% of the mothers had more than 15 years of education. Table 2
contains a summary of the predicted exposures across all grid cells in
the analysis. Table 3 presents the results from both the logistic mixed
model regressions for all exposure periods and the regression model for
all exposure periods. In the linear mixed model analyses a 10 μg/m3
increase of PM2.5 exposure during the last 30 days prior to delivery was
associated with a decrease of 8.80 g [95% confidence interval (CI) =
−10.32, -4.44] in birth weight. A 10 μg/m3 increase of PM2.5 exposure
during the last 90 days prior to delivery was associated with a decrease
of 9.20 g [95% confidence interval (CI) = −15.00, -3.30] in birth
weight. Finally, a 10 μg/m3 increase of PM2.5 exposure during the entire
pregnancy was associated with a decrease of 13.80 g [95% confidence
interval (CI) = −21.10, -6.04] in birth weight. The odds ratio for a
premature birth was 1.06 [95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.01--1.13] for
each 10 μg/m3 increase of PM2.5 exposure during the full pregnancy.
Other exposure periods were non-significant. In addition, all other
covariates acted as expected (see Appendix 1). For example cigarette use
both pre pregnancy and during pregnancy also decrease birth weight
significantly (Beta = −17.30, CI = −17.95,-16.65 per cigarette per day
smoked during pregnancy and Beta = −1.45 g, CI = −1.79, -1.11 per
cigarettes per day for smoking pre pregnancy) (see Appendix 1). These
results are for the full birth PM2.5 model but were essentially
identical across all 3 averaging times. Discussion We examined the
effects of PM2.5 exposure on birth outcomes in a study of singleton
births in seven Massachusetts counties between 2000 and 2008. Using a
model based on satellite remote sensing we were able to assign exposure
to all subjects, regardless of the distance between a participant's
residence and the closest PM2.5 monitor. We found a consistent effect of
exposure to PM2.5 on birth weight for infants who were born full term,
and an elevated risk of preterm delivery after adjusting for other
potential risk factors such as previous and current mother's health
conditions, socioeconomic factors and physical environment risk factors.
Importantly, this association remained after controlling for traffic
density within 100 meters of the residence and open space. Combined with
the fact that the satellite grid is too coarse to capture local effects
of high traffic on a nearby road, this suggests that the PM2.5 results

Kloog et al. Environmental Health 2012, 11:40
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/11/1/40

Page 5 of 8

Table 1 Descriptive statistics: Live births in eastern Massachusetts,
2000--2008 Characteristic

All births (% Total)

Mean Birth Weight (Grams)

SD

Male

49.36

3262.38

616.86

Female

51.14

3379.14

648.75

71.70

3368.2

627.35

7.99

3165.04

688.52

20.31

3220.94

623.57

2.68

3253.04

597.64

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  8-12
#+END_QUOTE

33.53

3259.15

635.04

13-15

42.62

3333.61

637.41

≥15

21.16

3375.29

621.90

Sex

Race White African-American Hispanic Education (years) ≤8

Age of mother ≤ 20

7.50

3192.03

612.17

20-29

34.72

3299.77

617.60

30-34

32.11

3359.42

634.44

35-39

20.41

3356.59

654.62

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  39
#+END_QUOTE

5.26

3292.81

692.11

we report here are due predominantly to non-primary traffic particles,
and that the traffic density variable captures the additional impact of
traffic pollution. In Massachusetts during these years, such non primary
particle exposures were mostly sulfates, from coal burning power plants,
and transported secondary organic aerosols, which are generated from a
variety of sources including traffic in upwind locations. A key feature
of the presented study compared to previous epidemiologic studies
showing associations between air pollution and birth weight [10,29,30]
is the exposure assignment. Since our model allows us to predict
temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 we can assign daily PM2.5
exposure to the entire study population, avoiding selection bias that
would yield a non-representative sample. In addition we account for
small area measures of potential confounders at a 10x10km spatial
resolution, thus minimizing exposure error. Knowledge of the exact
impact of PM2.5 on birth weight and its determinants is still very
limited. Fine particulate matter may affect birth weight through direct
or indirect means. Some studies have shown that PM2.5 is associated with
a number of cardiovascular and respiratory related outcomes both in
adults and children [31-33]. Maternal Table 2 Descriptive statistics for
PM Covariate

2.5

exposure to PM2.5 during pregnancy could indirectly affect fetal health
by adversely affecting the health of the mother. Since PM2.5 has been
associated with arterial narrowing [34,35], increased blood
pressure[36-39], and impaired endothelial function[40], this exposure
may impair the ability of the mother to deliver nutrients to the fetus.
Alternatively, fine particles could directly affect the health of the
infant, as fine particles are a mixture of different substances, many of
the them toxic, such as metals, and can also have toxic organic matter,
such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons absorbed on their surface [41].
Our results are in agreement with the previous studies which analyzed
the effect of exposure to PM2.5 [10,29] and add weight to the conclusion
that air pollutants negatively impact fetal development. A major
limitation of the present study is the spatial resolution of 10X10 km.
While estimation conducted at a finer spatial resolution is preferable,
PM2.5 is relatively homogeneous spatially [42], and so cells of this
size probably capture most of the spatial variability in exposure to
PM2.5, with the local traffic contribution captures by that separate
covariate. Moreover this coarse resolution, combined with our use of a
local traffic exposure variable allow us to focus on the effects of
regional pollutants in this

exposure, Massachusetts, 2000--2002 Mean

Median

SD

Range

IQR

Q1

Q3

Days of data available

PM2.5 exposure (μg/m )

9.6

8.4

5.1

159.7

5.3

6.3

11.6

3285

Cumulative traffic density (density*length)

1309

702

2076

36188

1352

258

1611

3285

3

Note: Q1 and Q3 are quartiles.

Kloog et al. Environmental Health 2012, 11:40
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/11/1/40

Page 6 of 8

Table 3 Odds ratio for premature births and change in birth weight for
full term births for each 10 μg/m3 increment in PM2.5 for various
exposure periods Exposure

Birth weight Change (in grams) (95% CI)

OR (95% CI)

Last month (30 days prior to birth)

−8.80

1.00 (0.96 to 1.04)

Last trimester (90 days prior to birth

−9.20*** (−15.00 to −3.30)

0.99 (0.94 to 1.03)

Entire birth period

−13.80*** (−21.10 to −6.05)

1.06*** (1.01 to 1.13)

Note:

--------------

--------------

(−10.32 to −4.44)

indicates a 0.01 significance level.

study. Another limitation of using a fixed 10x10km grid is the
Modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP) which refers to the problem of
information loss due to data aggregation [43], although MAUP is
especially acute when observations are represented by simple point data
[44] which is not the case in our study. It also should be noted that
the study only used outdoor exposure concentrations, which may differ
from indoor concentration and personal exposure but such data was
unavailable. As satellite remote sensing evolves and progresses, higher
spatial resolution data (e.g 3x3km and 1x1 km) should become available
in the next two years, which will further reduce exposure error. Such
increased resolution should enable us to more precisely estimate daily
exposures and how these vary across spatial locations.

Conclusions In summary, the presented study suggests that exposure to
PM2.5 during pregnancy contributes to the risk of preterm birth and
lower birth weight in infants. Appendix 1 Factors affecting birth weight
for all singleton live births in Eastern Massachusetts between
2000--2008.

Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Acknowledgments Supported by the Harvard Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) Center Grants R-832416, and R83479801, NIH
grants ES00002 and ES012044, and the Environment and Health Fund (EHF)
Israel. Author details 1 Department of Environmental Health - Exposure,
Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark
Center 401 Park Dr West, Boston, MA 02215, USA. 2Science Systems and
Applications, Inc, 10210 Greenbelt Road, Suite 600, Lanham, MD 20771,
USA. 3Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. Authors' contributions IK was the principal
investigator responsible for design, conduct, analysis, interpretation
of data and writing the manuscript. SJM was responsible for all GIS and
spatial analysis work. WLR was responsible for design, data management
and analysis. BAC participated as statistician and in the compilation
and interpretation of the data and JS made contributions to conception,
design, analysis of data and drafting the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript. Received: 12 December 2011 Accepted:
18 June 2012 Published: 18 June 2012 References 1. Bell ML, Belanger K,
Ebisu K, Gent JF, Lee HJ, Koutrakis P, Leaderer BP: Prenatal Exposure to
Fine Particulate Matter and Birth Weight: Variations by Particulate
Constituents and Sources. Epidemiology 2010, 21:884--891.
810.1097/EDE.1090b1013e3181f1092f1405. 2. Dejmek J, Selevan S, Benes I,
Solanský I, Srám R: Fetal growth and maternal exposure to particulate
matter during pregnancy. Environ Heal Perspect 1999, 107:475.

Model Covariates

Birth Weight Changes in grams Premature birth OR (CI 95% Low-95% Hi) (CI
95% Low-95% Hi)

PM2.5 exposure for entire birth period

−1.38

(−2.11;-0.65)

1.01

(0.29;0.40)

Normalized cumulative traffic density (density*length)

−0.04

(−0.09;0.02)

1.00

(1.00;1.01)

Maternal Age (yr)

7.82

(7.38;8.27)

0.99

(0.99;1.00)

Maternal Age

−0.21

(−0.24;-0.19)

1.00

(0.98;0.99)

Cigarettes per day during Pregnancy

−17.30

(−17.95;-16.65)

1.02

(1.00;1.01)

Cigarettes per day before Pregnancy

−1.45

(−1.79;-1.11)

1.00

(1.02;1.03)

Median Household Income in tract ($10,000)

1.58

(0.53;2.64)

0.99

(0.99;1.00)

Percent of Open Spaces

0.39

(0.2;0.58)

1.00

(0.99;1.00)

Gender of infant (males vs females)

−129.93

(−132.3;-127.55)

0.85

(0.83;0.86)

Previous birth of infant ? 4000 grams

477.78

(463.82;491.74)

0.46

(0.39;0.55)

Gestational diabetes

49.42

(42.86;55.98)

1.33

(1.27;1.41)

Hypertension

−91.30

(−98.29;-84.3)

1.94

(1.84;2.04)

Lung disease

−30.01

(−36.91;-23.12)

1.25

(1.18;1.32)

2

Kloog et al. Environmental Health 2012, 11:40
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/11/1/40

Page 7 of 8

(Continued) Non-gestational diabetes

93.18

(79.22;107.14)

1.98

(1.81;2.18)

Previous occurrence of preterm birth

−202.07

(−216.13;-188.01)

3.55

(3.31;3.8)

Appropriate plus

194.26

(164.19;224.33)

0.25

(0.22;0.29)

Appropriate

160.08

(129.92;190.24)

0.31

(0.27;0.36)

Intermediate

145.86

(115.1;176.62)

0.31

(0.27;0.36)

Inadequate

147.49

(111.8;183.17)

0.45

(0.38;0.55)

None

reference

APNCU:

Race: White

130.47

(127.02;133.93)

0.84

(0.81;0.86)

African-American

3.35

(−2.1;8.81)

1.20

(1.15;1.25)

Hispanic

reference (−16.88;-0.6)

1.28

(1.21;1.37)

Education: Education (reference- college or postgraduate (> 15 years) ):
−8.74 No High school (< 8 years)

−20.11

(−23.58;-16.64)

1.21

(1.17;1.25)

High school (>8 -- 12 years)

0.13

(−3.25;3.52)

1.10

(1.07;1.14)

Some college (13 -- 15 years)

reference (0.85;0.93)

Year: 2000

14.98

(9.47;20.5)

0.89

2001

9.42

(3.94;14.91)

0.91

(0.86;0.95)

2002

3.49

(−1.86;8.85)

0.92

(0.87;0.96)

2003

4.60

(−0.63;9.83)

0.97

(0.92;1.01)

2004

−1.59

(−6.76;3.58)

1.01

(0.96;1.05)

2005

−11.18

(−16.35;-6.01)

1.03

(0.98;1.08)

2006

−12.65

(−17.73;-7.57)

1.05

(1.01;1.09)

2007

−7.39

(−12.59;-2.18)

1.07

(1.02;1.12)

2008

reference

3. 

Glinianaia S, Rankin J, Bell R, Pless-Mulloli T, Howel D: Particulate
air pollution and fetal health: a systematic review of the epidemiologic
evidence. Epidemiology 2004, 15:36. 4. Gouveia N, Bremner S, Novaes H:
Association between ambient air pollution and birth weight in São Paulo,
Brazil. J Epidemiol Commun Health 2004, 58:11. 5. Ha E, Hong Y, Lee B,
Woo B, Schwartz J, Christiani D: Is air pollution a risk factor for low
birth weight in Seoul? Epidemiology 2001, 12:643. 6. Jedrychowski W,
Bendkowska I, Flak E, Penar A, Jacek R, Kaim I, Spengler J, Camann D,
Perera F: Estimated risk for altered fetal growth resulting from
exposure to fine particles during pregnancy: an epidemiologic
prospective cohort study in Poland. Environ Heal Perspect 2004,
112:1398. 7. Maisonet M, Bush T, Correa A, Jaakkola J: Relation between
ambient air pollution and low birth weight in the Northeastern United
States. Environ Heal Perspect 2001, 109:351. 8. Ritz B, Yu F, Chapa G,
Fruin S: Effect of air pollution on preterm birth among children born in
Southern California between 1989 and 1993. Epidemiology 2000, 11:502. 9.
Zeka A, Melly S, Schwartz J: The effects of socioeconomic status and
indices of physical environment on reduced birth weight and preterm
births in Eastern Massachusetts. Environ Heal 2008, 7:60. 10. Zeka A,
Schwartz J, Melly S: Traffic-Related and Socioeconomic Indicators in
Association With Low Birth Weight and Preterm Births in Eastern
Massachusetts Between 1996 and 2002. Epidemiology 2006, 17:S105. 11.
Ritz B, Wilhelm M, Zhao Y: Air pollution and infant death in southern
California, 1989--2000. Pediatrics 2006, 118:493.

12. Lee B, Ha E, Park H, Kim Y, Hong Y, Kim H, Lee J: Exposure to air
    pollution during different gestational phases contributes to risks
    of low birth weight. Hum Reprod 2003, 18:638.
13. Vassilev Z, Robson M, Klotz J: Associations of polycyclic organic
    matter in outdoor air with decreased birth weight: a pilot
    cross-sectional analysis. J Toxicol Environ Health Part A 2001,
    64:595--605.
14. Bobak M: Outdoor air pollution, low birth weight, and prematurity.
    Environ Health Perspect 2000, 108:173--176.
15. McCormick M: The contribution of low birth weight to infant
    mortality and childhood morbidity. N Engl J Med 1985, 312:82--90.
16. Vos L, Oren A, Bots M, Gorissen W, Grobbee D, Uiterwaal C: Birth
    size and coronary heart disease risk score in young adulthood. The
    Atherosclerosis Risk in Young Adults (ARYA) study. Eur J Epidemiol
    2006, 21:33--38.
17. Zeger SL, Thomas D, Dominici F, Samet JM, Schwartz J, Dockery D,
    Cohen A: Exposure measurement error in time-series studies of air
    pollution: concepts and consequences. Environ Heal Perspect 2000,
    108:419--426.
18. Aguilera I, Guxens M, Garcia-Esteban R, Corbella T, Nieuwenhuijsen
    MJ, Foradada CM, Sunyer J: Association between GIS-based exposure to
    urban air pollution during pregnancy and birth weight in the INMA
    Sabadell Cohort. Environ Heal Perspect 2009, 117:1322.
19. Brauer M, Lencar C, Tamburic L, Koehoorn M, Demers P, Karr C: A
    cohort study of traffic-related air pollution impacts on birth
    outcomes. Environ Heal Perspect 2008, 116:680.
20. Kloog I, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J: Assessing
    temporally and spatially resolved PM2. 5exposures for
    epidemiological studies using

Kloog et al. Environmental Health 2012, 11:40
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/11/1/40

21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 

satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos Environ 2011,
45:6267--6275. Lee H, Liu Y, Coull B, Schwartz J, Koutrakis P: A novel
calibration approach of MODIS AOD data to predict PM 2.5 concentrations.
Atmos Chem Phys Discuss 2011, 11:9769--9795. Krieger N, Waterman P,
Lemieux K, Zierler S, Hogan JW: On the wrong side of the tracts?
Evaluating the accuracy of geocoding in public health research. Am J
Public Health 2001, 91:1114. ESRI: ARCGIS. In Book ARCGIS (Editor
ed.\^eds.), 9.2 edition. City: ESRI; 2007. TIGER: Topologically
Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing system. In Book
Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing system
(Editor ed.\^eds.). City: US Census; 2006. MassGIS-EOEA: Massachusetts
Geographic Information System. In Book Massachusetts Geographic
Information System (Editor ed.\^eds.). City: Executive Office of
Environmental Affairs; 2006. Alexander G, Kotelchuck M: Quantifying the
adequacy of prenatal care: a comparison of indices. Publ Health Rep
1996, 111:408. USCB: United States Census Bureau of 2000. In Book United
States Census Bureau of 2000 (Editor ed.\^eds.). City: US Census Bureau;
2000. Coull BA, Schwartz J, Wand M: Respiratory health and air
pollution: additive mixed model analyses. Biostatistics Oxford England
2001, 2:337. Bell ML, Ebisu K, Belanger K: Ambient air pollution and low
birth weight in Connecticut and Massachusetts. Environ Heal Perspect
2007, 115:1118. Salam MT, Millstein J, Li YF, Lurmann FW, Margolis HG,
Gilliland FD: Birth outcomes and prenatal exposure to ozone, carbon
monoxide, and particulate matter: results from the Children's Health
Study. Environ Heal Perspect 2005, 113:1638. Brunekreef B, Holgate ST:
Air pollution and health. Lancet 2002, 360:1233--1242. Laden F, Neas LM,
Dockery DW, Schwartz J: Association of fine particulate matter from
different sources with daily mortality in six US cities. Environ Heal
Perspect 2000, 108:941. Schwartz J, Neas LM: Fine particles are more
strongly associated than coarse particles with acute respiratory health
effects in schoolchildren. Epidemiology 2000, 11:6--10. Urch B, Brook
JR, Wasserstein D, Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Corey P, Silverman F:
Relative contributions of PM2.5 chemical constituents to acute arterial
vasoconstriction in humans. Inhal Toxicol 2004, 16:345--352. Adar SD,
Klein R, Klein BE, Szpiro AA, Cotch MF, Wong TY, O'Neill MS, Shrager S,
Barr RG, Siscovick DS, et al: Air Pollution and the microvasculature: a
cross-sectional assessment of in vivo retinal images in the
population-based multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis (MESA). PLoS Med
2010, 7:e1000372. Brook RD: Cardiovascular effects of air pollution.
Clin Sci Lond 2008, 115:175--187. Chuang KJ, Yan YH, Chiu SY, Cheng TJ:
Long-term air pollution exposure and risk factors for cardiovascular
diseases among the elderly in Taiwan. Occup Environ Med 2011, 68:64--68.
Bartoli CR, Wellenius GA, Diaz EA, Lawrence J, Coull BA, Akiyama I, Lee
LM, Okabe K, Verrier RL, Godleski JJ: Mechanisms of inhaled fine
particulate air pollution-induced arterial blood pressure changes.
Environ Health Perspect 2009, 117:361--366. Mordukhovich I, Wilker E,
MacIntosh H, Wright R, Vokonas P, Sparrow D, Schwartz J: Black Carbon
Exposure, Oxidative Stress Genes, and Blood Pressure in a Repeated
Measures Study. Environ Health Perspect 2009, 117(11):1767--1772.
O'Neill MS, Veves A, Zanobetti A, Sarnat JA, Gold DR, Economides PA,
Horton ES, Schwartz J: Diabetes enhances vulnerability to particulate
air pollution-associated impairment in vascular reactivity and
endothelial function. Circulation 2005, 111:2913--2920. Dejmek J,
Solanský I, Benes I, Lenícek J, Srám RJ: The impact of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons and fine particles on pregnancy outcome. Environ
Heal Perspect 2000, 108:1159. Liu Y, Sarnat JA, Kilaru V, Jacob DJ,
Koutrakis P: Estimating ground-level PM2. 5 in the eastern United States
using satellite remote sensing. Environ Sci Technol 2005, 39:3269--3278.
Dark SJ, Bram D: The modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP) in physical
geography. Prog Phys Geogr 2007, 31:471. Gelfand AE, Zhu L, Carlin BP:
On the change of support problem for spatio-temporal data. Biostatistics
2001, 2:31--45.

Page 8 of 8

doi:10.1186/1476-069X-11-40 Cite this article as: Kloog et al.: Using
new satellite based exposure methods to study the association between
pregnancy pm2.5 exposure, premature birth and birth weight in
Massachusetts. Environmental Health 2012 11:40.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central and take full advantage
of: • Convenient online submission • Thorough peer review • No space
constraints or color ﬁgure charges • Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar • Research which
is freely available for redistribution Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit


