Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Atmospheric Environment journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/atmosenv

A new hybrid spatio-temporal model for estimating daily multi-year PM2.5
concentrations across northeastern USA using high resolution aerosol
optical depth data Itai Kloog a, *, Alexandra A. Chudnovsky b, Allan C.
Just c, Francesco Nordio c, Petros Koutrakis c, Brent A. Coull d, Alexei
Lyapustin e, Yujie Wang f, Joel Schwartz c a

Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva, Israel Department of
Geography and Human Environment, Tel-Aviv University, Israel Department
of Environmental Health e Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program,
Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Center, 401 Park Drive West,
Boston, MA 02215, USA d Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA 02215, USA e GEST/UMBC, NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center, Baltimore, MD, USA f University of Maryland Baltimore
County, Baltimore, MD, USA b c

h i g h l i g h t s  Our Models resulted in very high out-of-sample R2
(R2 ¼ 0.88).  Our model performed well both spatially and temporally
(R2 ¼ 0.87, R2 ¼ 0.87).  Our results revealed very little bias (Slope
of predictions versus withheld observations ¼ 0.99).  Importantly,
these R2 are for daily, rather than monthly or yearly, values.

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history: Received 10 April 2014 Received in revised form 2 July
2014 Accepted 3 July 2014 Available online 5 July 2014

The use of satellite-based aerosol optical depth (AOD) to estimate ﬁne
particulate matter (PM2.5) for epidemiology studies has increased
substantially over the past few years. These recent studies often report
moderate predictive power, which can generate downward bias in effect
estimates. In addition, AOD measurements have only moderate spatial
resolution, and have substantial missing data. We make use of recent
advances in MODIS satellite data processing algorithms (Multi-Angle
Implementation of Atmospheric Correction (MAIAC), which allow us to use
1 km (versus currently available 10 km) resolution AOD data. We
developed and cross validated models to predict daily PM2.5 at a 1  1
km resolution across the northeastern USA (New England, New York and New
Jersey) for the years 2003e2011, allowing us to better differentiate
daily and long term exposure between urban, suburban, and rural areas.
Additionally, we developed an approach that allows us to generate daily
high-resolution 200 m localized predictions representing deviations from
the area 1  1 km grid predictions. We used mixed models regressing
PM2.5 measurements against day-speciﬁc random intercepts, and ﬁxed and
random AOD and temperature slopes. We then use generalized additive
mixed models with spatial smoothing to generate grid cell predictions
when AOD was missing. Finally, to get 200 m localized predictions, we
regressed the residuals from the ﬁnal model for each monitor against the
local spatial and temporal variables at each monitoring site. Our model
performance was excellent (mean out-of-sample R2 ¼ 0.88). The spatial
and temporal components of the out-of-sample results also presented very
good ﬁts to the withheld data (R2 ¼ 0.87, R2 ¼ 0.87). In addition, our
results revealed very little bias in the predicted concentrations (Slope
of predictions versus withheld observations ¼ 0.99). Our daily model
results show high predictive accuracy at high spatial resolutions and
will be useful in reconstructing exposure histories for epidemiological
studies across this region. © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Air pollution Aerosol optical depth (AOD) Epidemiology PM2.5
Exposure error High resolution aerosol retrieval MAIAC

-  Corresponding author. E-mail address: ikloog@bgu.ac.il (I. Kloog).
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.07.014 1352-2310/© 2014
   Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

582

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

1. Introduction The use of satellite-based aerosol optical depth (AOD)
   to estimate exposure to ﬁne particulate matter (PM2.5-particulate
   matter <2.5 mm in aerodynamic diameter) concentrations for
   epidemiologic studies has increased substantially over the past few
   years (Chang et al., 2013; A.A. Chudnovsky et al., 2013; Chudnovsky
   et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2013; Kloog et al., 2012b, 2011; Lee et
   al., 2011; Lin et al., 2013; Nordio et al., 2013). Both short term
   (hours, days) and chronic (months, years) exposure to PM2.5 has been
   extensively associated with detrimental human health effects (Halonen
   et al., 2008; Kloog et al., 2012a; Peacock et al., 2011; Zanobetti
   and Schwartz, 2009). Fine PM exposures were found to be associated
   with respiratory and cardiovascular morbidity, mortality from
   cardiovascular and respiratory diseases and an increase in hospital
   admissions (Dominici et al., 2006; Kloog et al., 2012a; Schwartz,
   1996). Traditionally, estimation of PM2.5 exposures has been based on
   using measurements of a central ground monitor, and assigning these
   measurement to populations within a speciﬁed distance of the monitor
   (Laden et al., 2006; Samet et al., 2000). This approach introduces
   exposure error (also known as exposure misclassiﬁcation), and likely
   biases the effect estimates downward due to spatial misalignment
   (Zeger et al., 2000). In recent years, to avoid this exposure
   misclassiﬁcation, many studies have used regression models based on
   geographic covariates (termed “land use” regressions e LUR) to expand
   in situ measurements of PM2.5 concentrations to large areas. LUR is
   essentially an interpolation technique that employs the PM2.5
   concentrations as the dependent variable, with proximate land use,
   trafﬁc and physical environmental variables used as independent
   predictors (Beckerman et al., 2013; Gryparis et al., 2009; Hoek et
   al., 2008; Vienneau et al., 2010). Since the geographic covariates
   are generally not time varying, the temporal resolution of the LU
   model predictions is limited and thus can only be employed to assess
   long-term exposures for chronic health effects studies. Finally,
   current exposure assessments are limited to urban areas due to the
   paucity of monitoring sites in rural locations. Satellite-based AOD
   provides physical daily measurements that can be used to estimate air
   quality and pollution due to its extensive spatial coverage and
   repeated observations of the earth surface and atmosphere. AOD is a
   measure of the extinction of electromagnetic radiation at a given
   wavelength due to the presence of aerosols in an atmospheric column.
   However, satellite-based AOD is a measure of light attenuation in the
   column which is affected by ambient conditions (such as vertical
   proﬁle, chemical composition and humidity). In contrast, PM2.5 is a
   measure of dry particle mass near the surface and thus we do not
   expect them to be strongly correlated (Chudnovsky et al., 2012). In
   recent years many studies have used various statistical methods to
   establish quantitative relationships between AOD and PM2.5 (Chang et
   al., 2013; A. Chudnovsky et al., 2013; Cordero et al., 2013; Gupta et
   al., 2013; Kim et al., 2013). Traditionally, the health exposure
   studies have used the standard MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging
   Spectroradiometer) AOD product of the “Dark Target” algorithm (Levy
   et al., 2007) which has a nadir resolution of 10  10 km2. Lately,
   AOD at signiﬁcantly higher spatial resolution (1  1 km2) has been
   offered by a new Multi-Angle Implementation of Atmospheric Correction
   (MAIAC) algorithm. Chang et al. (2013) used some novel ideas such as
   a statistical downscaling and data fusion techniques to predict PM2.5
   concentrations at spatial point locations in the southeastern United
   States during the period 2003e2005. Their model showed relatively
   high cross-validated predictions (R2 ¼ 0.78 and a root mean-squared
   error (RMSE) of

3.61 mg/m3). Chudnovsky et al. (2014) used one year of observations from
MODIS based Aqua at a 1 km spatial resolution to obtain daily PM2.5
estimates for AOD retrieval days. Their model results indicated that
high resolution MAIAC (Multi-Angle Implementation of Atmospheric
Correction) data better explains the variations in PM2.5 However, the
developed model was restricted to retrieval days, and the out-of-sample
predictive performance spatially was similar to that estimated by Chang
et al. (spatial R2 ¼ 0.79). These recent studies, while generally
showing better ﬁts than previous models, still leave room for
improvement in terms of reducing exposure error. In addition, they all
lack detailed high resolution predictions across large space-time
domains (especially in rural areas) which is critical for acute exposure
epidemiologic studies. In this paper, we incorporate MAIAC-based AOD
satellite data which allows us to present a much simpliﬁed model, while
still improving signiﬁcantly over currently available models. We
developed and validated models to predict daily PM2.5 at a 1  1 km
resolution across the northeastern USA (New England, New York and New
Jersey) for the years 2003e2011, allowing us to better differentiate
daily and long term exposure between urban, suburban, and rural areas.
Additionally, we developed an approach that allows us to generate daily
high-resolution 200  200 m localized predictions that are separate from
the area 1 1 km grid predictions. 2. Material and methods 2.1. Study
domain The spatial domain of our region included the Northeastern part
of the USA (Fig. 1), and includes the states of Connecticut, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island and
Vermont. Many urban areas (notably New York and Boston) are included as
well as rural hill towns, large forested regions, water bodies,
mountains and the Atlantic sea shoreline. The study area included
285,284 discrete 1  1 km satellite grid cells. 2.2. AOD data One of the
fundamental aerosol products from MODIS is spectral AOD (sometime
referred to as Aerosol Optical Thickness or AOT). This is a global level
2 daily MODIS product. The details of the standard “Dark Target” (DT)
MODIS algorithm over land providing 10  10 km2 resolution AOD have been
broadly reported (Levy et al., 2007; Remer et al., 2005). Recently a new
processing algorithm (MAIAC) has been developed that provides a high 1
km resolution AOD from MODIS data (Chudnovsky et al., 2014; Lyapustin et
al., 2011a, 2011b). MAIAC processing begins with the gridding of MODIS
L1B data to a ﬁxed 1 km grid, and accumulation of up to 16 days of
measurements in the memory. Then it uses time series analysis and
processing of groups of pixels to derive surface bidirectional
reﬂectance distribution function (BRDF) and aerosol parameters without
assumptions typical of current MODIS operational processing algorithms.
The spatio-temporal analysis also helps MAIAC's cloud mask augmenting
traditional pixel-level cloud detection techniques. In this analysis we
used MAIAC AOD based on collection 6 MODIS Aqua L1B data for the years
2003e2011. 2.3. Monitoring data Data for daily PM2.5 mass concentrations
across the Northeast region (see Fig. 1) for the years 2003e2011 were
obtained from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Air Quality
System

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

583

Fig. 1. Map of the study area showing the location of EPA and IMPROVE
monitoring sites across the Northeastern USA.

(AQS) database as well as the IMPROVE (Interagency Monitoring of
Protected Visual Environments) network. IMPROVE monitor sites are
located in national parks and wilderness areas while EPA monitoring
sites are located across the Mid-Atlantic including urban areas such as
New York City, Boston, etc. There were 161 monitors with unique
locations operating in the Northeast during the study period. The Mean
PM2.5 across the Northeast during the study period was 11.7 mg/m3 with a
standard deviation of 7.8 mg/m3 and an interquartile range (IQR) of 9.1
mg/m3. 2.4. Spatial predictors of PM2.5 We used a hybrid model,
containing both AOD, land use, and meteorological predictors. The
following spatial predictors were used: population density, elevation,
trafﬁc density, percentages of land use according to 12 land use
categories based on United States Geological Survey (USGS) National Land
Cover Dataset (NLCD), point emissions and total area-source emissions
(tons per year) for PM2.5, PM10, SO2, and NOx. Elevation: Elevation data
were added through a satellite-based digital elevation model from the
USGS National Elevation Dataset (NED) covering the United States at a
spatial resolution of 1 arc sec (Maune, 2007). There are sharp elevation
contrasts across such a large

study area and thus we used elevation as a spatial predictor (generally
higher elevations are associated with lower air temperatures). Trafﬁc
density: Road data were obtained through the U.S. Census 2000
topologically integrated geographic encoding and referencing system
(TIGER, 2006). We calculated the total A1 road length (class 1 roads
that are hard surface highways including Interstate and U.S. numbered
highways, primary State routes, and all controlled access highways)
across the study area. The A1 roads were intersected with the 1  1 km
grid and the resulting attribute tables contained the density of all A1
road segment lengths in each 1 km2 grid cells. Population density:
Population density data were obtained through the U.S. Census 2000
dataset (Census, 2000). We calculated the weight-averaged population for
each 1  1 km grid cell based on the tracts intersecting these grid
cells. Point emissions: Additional point emissions data for PM2.5, PM10,
SO2, and NOx were obtained through the 2005 U.S. EPA National Emissions
Inventory (NEI) facility emissions report (EPA, 2010). Locations
reporting zero emissions within the appropriate grid cell were assigned
a value of one-half of the minimum value among all monitoring locations.
Area-source emissions: Area-source PM2.5, PM10, SO2, and NOx emissions
data were obtained through the 2005 U.S. EPA-NEI tiered emissions
reports (EPA, 2010), which provide estimates of total

584

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

area-source emissions by county and year. Intersecting source emission
areas for each 1  1 km grid were calculated by weight averaging the
values from each intersecting areas intersecting n each 1  1 km grid
cell. Percentages of land use: We used the NLCD from 2001 (Homer et al.,
2004), available as raster ﬁles with a 30 m spatial resolution. We
calculate the percentages of mixed forest, deciduous forest, evergreen,
crop, pasture, grass, shrub, water, high development, medium
development, low development and open development areas in each 1  1 km
grid across the study area. 2.5. Temporal predictors of PM2.5
Meteorological data: All meteorological variables used in the analysis
were obtained through the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC, 2010).
Only continuous operating stations with daily data running from 2003 to
2011 were used (26 stations spread across the study area). Grid cells
were matched to the closest weather station with available
meteorological variables (24 h means). We used the following
meteorological variables: air temperature, wind speed, daily visibility,
sea land pressure (SLP) and relative humidity. All the variables
represent 24 h averages except visibility, which is only computed during
daylight hours. NDVI: We used the publicly available monthly MODIS NDVI
(Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) product (MOD13A3) at 1 km
spatial resolution. The monthly resolution was chosen since NDVI values
do not change considerably within a month except periods of spring
green-up and fall senescence. PBL: We used publicly available daily data
on the height of the planetary boundary layer (PBL) obtained from the
NOAA Reanalysis Data (NOAA, 2010). The spatial scale of the data was 32
 32 km. The height of the boundary layer may vary with wind speed (Oke,
1987), inﬂuencing the concentration and vertical proﬁle of pollutants.
The boundary layer not only controls transport and location of
pollutants and aerosols but also their concentrations would be different
in variable boundary layer structures (Angevine et al., 2013). 2.6.
Statistical methods All modeling was done using the R statistical
software version 3.02 and SAS (Statistical Analysis System) version 9.3.
As we have shown in previous studies (Chudnovsky et al., 2014; Kloog et
al., 2012b, 2011) there is a varying spatial relationship between AOD
and PM2.5 on a single day due to differences in factors including
particle composition, PBL, relative humidity, vertical proﬁles. Thus, we
use a mixed effects model incorporating spatial and temporal predictors
and day-speciﬁc random-effects to take into account these temporal
variations in the PM2.5eAOD relationship. Since the exposure predictions
generated by our model are primarily intended for use in epidemiologic
health effect studies, we generate exposure predictions at two different
spatial scales at which health data are typically collected: small area
(zip code, census tract, etc) geocoded data (SAGD) and address-speciﬁc

geocoded data (RGD). When only SAGD health data is available, we use
predictions at the 1  1 km grid cell level, whereas when RGD are
available, we add an additional local daily estimation component at a
very high resolution (200  200 m) to the grid-level predictions. Using
higher resolution MAIAC data compared to our previous 10  10 km MODIS
AOD data allowed us to simplify our approach in this way. All models
were ﬁt to data from each year (2003e2011) separately. To generate the
daily 1  1 km PM2.5 predictions in each grid cell for the entire
2003e2011 period, we developed a prediction process using a series of
models: The ﬁrst model calibrates the AOD grid-level observations to the
PM2.5 monitoring data collected within 1 km of an AOD value, while
adjusting for the land use and meteorological variables. In the second
model we predict daily PM2.5 concentrations in grid cells without
monitors but with available AOD measurements using the model 1 ﬁt. Then
in the third model, to estimate daily PM2.5 in grid cells with no AOD on
that day, we take advantage of the region-speciﬁc association between
grid-cell AOD and PM2.5 levels, and the association between PM2.5 level
in a given grid with that in neighboring grid cells. To generate the
daily 200  200 m PM2.5 local predictions for studies using RGD, we take
the residuals of model 3 at each monitoring site (that is the ground
level PM2.5 data minus the model 3 predictions) and regress them against
very ﬁne (200  200) monitor-speciﬁc spatial and temporal predictors of
PM2.5 which included trafﬁc density, population density, elevation,
percent urban, distance to major roads (A1), distance to source emission
points, PBL and visibility. This stage allows us to predict local PM
throughout the study area on any given day. To accommodate the fact that
daily AOD data missingness is not random, the ﬁrst stage model
incorporated inverse probability weighting (IPW) to potentially avoid
bias in the regression coefﬁcient estimates and thus in the resulting
predictions. This approach effectively up-weights dates and grid cells
which are underrepresented due to a large degree of missing data. To
obtain the weights that account for the non-random missingness in AOD
values, we ﬁt the following logistic regression model for the
probability (p) of observing an AOD value in cell i on day j:

  b p ¼ b0 þ b1 Elevationi þ b2 SLPij þ b3 Temperatureij ln 1b p þ
Month IPW ¼

  1 b p

1) 

where (p) is the probability for availability of AOD in each day in each
grid cell in each year. There were no observations which had a
disproportionate inﬂuence in the yearly models. Finally, since the daily
PMeAOD calibration factors can vary spatially, the study area is divided
into 7 regions. The day-speciﬁc intercept, AOD, and temperature random
effects in the model are nested within regions of the study.
Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst model can be written as

5 28 2     X X X   PMij ¼ a þ uj þ gjðregÞ þ b1 þ vj þ hjðregÞ
AODij þ b2 þ kj Temperatureij þ g1m X1mi þ g2m X2mj þ g3m X3mij þ εij
m¼1 m¼1 m¼1   uvk  j j j eN½ð000Þ;  s gjðregÞ ; hjðregÞ e½ð00Þ;
sREG 

2) 

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

where PMij is the measured PM2.5 concentration at a spatial site i on
day j; a and uj are the ﬁxed and random (day-speciﬁc) intercepts,
respectively, AODij is the AOD value in the grid cell corresponding to
site i on day j; b1 and vj are the ﬁxed and day-speciﬁc random slopes,
respectively. Temperatureij is the temperature value in the grid cell
corresponding to site i on day j; and, b2 and kj are the ﬁxed and random
slopes for temperature. X1mi is the value of the mth spatial predictor
at site i, X2mj is the value of the mth temporal predictor on day j, and
X3mij is the value of the mth spatial-temporal predictor at site i on
day j. gj(reg) and hj(reg) are the daily random intercepts and AOD
slopes speciﬁc to each study area region, nested within the overall
random effects uj and vj. Here, we assume s is a 3  3 diagonal matrix
with diagonal elements s2u, s2v, s2k,, and sREG is a 2  2 diagonal
matrix with diagonal elements s2g, s2h. We used ten-folds out-of-sample
cross validation (CV) to validate our model 1 predictions. We randomly
divide our data into 90 and 10 percent splits ten times. We predict for
the 10% datasets using the model ﬁtted from the remaining 90% of the
data. We then report these computed R2 values. To test our results for
bias we regress the measured PM value for a given site and day against
the corresponding predicted value. We estimated the model prediction
precision by taking the square root of the mean squared prediction
errors (RMSPE). In addition we calculated prediction errors from a model
that contained the spatial components only, to make it more comparable
to the commonly used monthly/yearly prediction models available such as
Yanosky et al. (2008). Temporal R2 was calculated by regressing Delta PM
against Delta predicted where: Delta PM is the difference between the
actual PM in place i at time j and the annual mean PM at that location,
and Delta predicted is deﬁned similarly for the predicted values
generated from the model. Spatial R2 was calculated by regressing the
site-speciﬁc annual means in observed PM versus the same annual means
for predicted PM. The next model (model 2), uses the ﬁt of model 1 to
predict a PM2.5 concentration for each day and grid cell at which we
have an observed AOD value. This resulted in yearly datasets with PM2.5
prediction for all day-grid cell combinations with available AOD. In
model 3 of the sequence, we estimate daily PM2.5 for all grid cells in
the study area even in days when no AOD data are present. We ﬁt a
generalized additive model with a smooth function of latitude and
longitude (using the grid cell centroids) and a random intercept for
each cell. This is similar to other interpolation techniques (universal
kriging, etc.) to use nearby grid cells to help ﬁll in the missing,
however we also construct a 100 km buffer around each grid cell and ﬁt a
regression analysis relating the predicted PM at each grid cell to the
daily mean PM2.5 from the stations in each buffer around that grid cell,
which also aids in predicting the value on missing days. The 100 km
buffer size was chosen since we wanted a small enough buffer to ensure
relevance and hence improve the R2 of the monitored value on the grid
cell values, but large enough a buffer to include multiple PM monitors
to produce more stable estimates (again improving the prediction R2). To
allow for temporal variations in the spatial correlation, we ﬁt a
separate spatial surface for each two-month period of each year. Using
this method provides additional information about the concentration in
the missing grid cells that classic interpolation would not provide.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁt the following semiparametric regression model:

PredPMij ¼ ða þ ui Þ þ ðb1 þ vi ÞMPMij þ sðXi ; Yi ÞkðjÞ þ εij ;

 ðui vi Þe ð00Þ; Ub

3) 

where PredPMij is the predicted PM2.5 concentration at a grid cell i on
a day j from the model 2; MPMij is the mean PM in the relevant 100 km
buffer for site i on a day j; a and ui are the ﬁxed and grid-cell
speciﬁc random intercepts, respectively; b1 and vi are the ﬁxed and

585

random slopes, respectively. The smooth Xi,Yi are the latitude and
longitude, respectively, of the centroid of grid cell i, and
s(Xi,Yi)k(j) is the a smooth function of location (modeled by thin plate
splines) speciﬁc to the two-month period k(j) in which day j falls (that
is, a separate spatial smooth was ﬁt for each two-month period). To
estimate the goodness of ﬁt and due to computational limits, we used a
“leave 10 out” approach where we randomly selected 10 monitors to leave
out of the model 3 predictions. We the test the ﬁt and bias (regressing
the measured PM values against the predicted values and predicting PM
levels at the left out monitoring locations). Finally, we run a forth
model where we take the residuals constructed by taking the difference
between a given daily monitored PM2.5 concentration and the 1 km  1 km
corresponding daily model 3 prediction, and regress that against spatial
and temporal predictors of PM2.5 at each monitor. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁt the
following model:

ResidPMij ¼ f1 ðTraffic densityi ; Population densityi Þ þ f2
ðElevationi Þ þ f3 ðPercent urbani Þ þ f4 ðDistance to A1 roadsi Þ

  þ f5 ðDistance to point emissionsi Þ þ f6 PBLij   þ f7 Traffic
densityi ; PBLij   þ f8ij Traffic densityi ; Visibilityij þ εij (4)
where ResidPMij is the residual at a spatial monitor site i on day j; f1
denotes a penalized spline for an interaction between trafﬁc density and
population density at a spatial monitor site i; f2ef6 denote
(potentially nonlinear) effects of elevation, percent urban land use,
distance to A1 road, distance to point emissions and PBL respectively at
a spatial monitor site i (and day j for PBL). f7 denotes a penalized
spline for an interaction between trafﬁc density and PBL at a spatial
monitor site i on day j and f8 denotes a penalized spline for an
interaction between trafﬁc density and visibility at a spatial monitor
site i on day j. Finally εij is the error. 3. Results Overall mean for
MAIAC AOD was 0.25. Fig. 2 presents the mean ground PM2.5 measurements
across all years (2003e2011) and the difference between monitor and
predicted PM2.5 concentrations at each monitoring site. The ﬁgure shows
how measured PM2.5 concentrations at monitors corresponds well with our
predicted concentrations, and the differences at 95% of the monitoring
sites are within ±1.3 mg/m3, clearly showing excellent agreement between
observed and predicted values. Fig. 3a presents a density plot
exhibiting the daily variation of AOD slopes between 2003 and 2011
during model 1 calibrations, while Fig. 3b presents a density plot
exhibiting the daily variation of temperature slopes for the same
period. The ﬁgure shows there is considerable day-to-day variability in
these slopes. Table 1 presents results from our model 1 calibration
analysis. The yearly predictive power of our model is extremely high,
with an overall “out-of-sample” R2 for daily values of 0.88
(year-to-year variation 0.82e0.90), with a highly signiﬁcant association
between PM2.5 and the main explanatory variable-AOD. The models yield
almost no bias in our cross validation results as the slope of observed
versus predicted ¼ 0.99 (year-to-year variation 0.98e1.01). The spatial
and temporal out-of-sample results also presented excellent ﬁts (Table
1): For the temporal model, the mean “out-of-sample” R2 was 0.87
(year-to-year variation

Fig. 2. EPA and IMPROVE PM2.5 annual means and the difference between
measured and estimated PM2.5 concentrations at each PM2.5 monitor.

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

587

Fig. 3. Density plots exhibiting the daily variation of AOD slopes (a)
and temperature slopes (b) between 2003 and 2011 during the stage 1
calibrations.

Table 1 Prediction accuracy: Ten-fold cross-validated R2 for PM2.5 stage
1 predictions (Calibration stage for 2003e2011). Year

R2

Slope

Spatial R2

Temporal R2

RMSPE (mg/m3)

Spatial RMSPE (mg/m3)

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Overall Mean 2003e2011

0.89 0.89 0.88 0.89 0.90 0.88 0.86 0.90 0.82 0.88

0.98 0.99 0.98 1.00 1.01 0.99 0.98 0.99 0.99 0.99

0.87 0.90 0.87 0.85 0.93 0.92 0.86 0.84 0.80 0.87

0.88 0.88 0.87 0.88 0.90 0.86 0.84 0.89 0.81 0.87

2.89 2.34 2.85 2.30 2.34 2.22 1.97 1.85 2.22 2.33

1.05 0.85 1.00 0.81 0.73 0.72 0.71 0.69 0.82 0.82

0.81e0.90) and for the spatial model the mean “out-of-sample” R2 was
0.87 (year-to-year variation 0.80e0.93). When looking at Root Mean
Square Prediction Error (RMSPE), our models exhibit very low RMSPE
values of 2.33 mg/m3 (year-to-year variation 1.95e2.89 mg/m3). Our
“spatial” component only RMSPE is much lower at 0.82 mg/m3. The ﬁnal
prediction model (model 3) presents very similar results and is
presented in Table 2. Fig. 4 shows the spatial pattern of predicted
PM2.5 concentrations in Boston from the AOD models, averaged over the
entire study period. The spatial variation in these long term PM2.5
predictions ranges from 2.36 mg/m3 to 40.12 mg/m3 showing a good range
of variability for our model.

Fig. 5 shows the deviation of the estimated local PM2.5 concentrations
(model 4) from the average 1  1 km PM2.5 concentrations at a very ﬁne
resolution (200  200 m) aggregated over a year (2003) in Boston. 4.
Discussion In this paper we used novel 1 km AOD MODIS data based on the
MAIAC algorithm to predict PM2.5 concentrations across the Northeastern
USA. Using the newly available MAIAC data allows us to simplify our
previously described models while still gaining much better predictive
power and reducing the exposure error. In

Table 2 Prediction accuracy: R2 for stage 3 PM2.5 predictions (ﬁnal
prediction model including locations without AOD for 2003e2011). Year

R2

Slope

Spatial R2

Temporal R2

RMSPE (mg/m3)

Spatial RMSPE (mg/m3)

Slope for leave 10-out

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Overall Mean

0.91 0.89 0.88 0.89 0.91 0.87 0.87 0.89 0.84 0.88

1.02 1.01 1.01 1.02 1.01 0.99 1.01 1.00 1.01 1.01

0.88 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.96 0.96 0.94 0.96 0.92 0.93

0.91 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.91 0.86 0.86 0.88 0.83 0.88

2.69 2.47 2.79 2.37 2.26 2.30 1.95 1.91 2.09 2.32

0.65 0.60 0.63 0.53 0.47 0.42 0.37 0.29 0.39 0.48

1.09 1.09 1.10 1.08 1.04 1.03 1.06 1.04 1.05 1.07

588

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

Fig. 4. Mean PM2.5 concentrations in each 1  1 km grid cell in Boston
during 2003 predicted by the AOD models.

addition, in our updated model we introduce signiﬁcant methodological
improvements with the predictions for daily ﬁne resolution (200  200 m)
PM exposure, which can better capture pollution attributed to local
sources such as trafﬁc. Our models yield extremely good model ﬁts and
observed versus predicted slopes that were practically ‘1', which
clearly show that there is no bias in the resulting exposure
predictions. It is important to compare the predictions of our models to
the other ‘state of the art' prediction models that are available today.

While the various existing models have all advanced in the past few
years (including some models that use MAIAC data as well), they all
still lack the ability to generate daily predictions for studies of the
acute effects (short term) of air pollution as well as chronic (long
term) effects, which are useful in epidemiologic studies aiming to
estimate both acute and chronic effects of exposure. Sampson et al.
(2013) recently published a universal kriging model using Partial Least
Squares regression for estimating annual PM2.5 concentrations. They
present a high accuracy of prediction with an overall R2

Fig. 5. The deviations of the estimated local pollution concentrations
at a very ﬁne resolution (200  200 m) from the average 1  1 km grid
PM2.5 aggregated over a year (2003) in Boston.

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

of 0.88 and well-calibrated predictive intervals. While the prediction
accuracy of this model for long-term exposures is high, this model (1)
does not predict daily and (2) is complex and requires an enormous
number of spatial variables that are not always freelyavailable to
researchers. In contrast our model presents similar spatial accuracy (R2
¼ 0.87), but with the additional advantage of yielding daily predictions
also with very good prediction accuracy (temporal R2 ¼ 0.87). Hu et al.
(2014) published a study estimating ground-level PM2.5 concentrations in
the Southeastern United States. Similar to our model they used MODIS
based MAIAC data with a two-stage spatial statistical model with
meteorological ﬁelds and land use parameters as ancillary variables to
estimate daily mean PM2.5 concentrations. The model was run in
southeastern USA, for the year 2003. They used cross validation and
predicted for only days with available MAIAC data resulting in an R2 of
0.67 and RMSPE of 3.88 mg/m3. Their models do not yield daily
predictions (in every grid cell on every day) and are less accurate
compared to our presented model (such as cross validated RMSPE of 3.88
mg/m3 compared to 2.33 mg/m3 in our model). Other models published
recently have all similar issues with lack of highly accurate daily
predictions across the study area (Kim et al., 2013; Lin et al., 2013;
Liu et al., 2009; Yanosky et al., 2008; Yap and Hashim, 2013). It is
important to note that Beckerman (Beckerman et al., 2013) recently
published results showing that in a Hybrid model estimating national
scale spatio-temporal variability of pm2.5 the inclusion of satellite
based AOD into the LUR model did not improve the model. The study though
used the older 10  10 MODIS data and generally the cross validated
results were lower than our presented models (R2 ¼ 0.79). Although the
new 1  1 km MAIAC data is a considerable improvement over the previous
MODIS 10  10 km data (for example, R2 ¼ 0.83 for our previously
published 10 km model versus R2 ¼ 0.88 in the current MAIAC model,
spatial R2 ¼ 0.78 versus R2 ¼ 0.87), ﬁner scale or less noisy future
satellite-based data could further reduce exposure error bias resulting
in larger and more accurate health effects estimates. Jerrett et al.
(2005) have previously demonstrated how ﬁne-scale variations in PM2.5
are associated with larger health effects than those that vary
regionally. We partly address this limitation in our model by adding our
new local stage model 4 predictions at very ﬁne 200  200 m scale that
complements our 1  1 km predictions. Acknowledgments Supported by the
Harvard Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Center Grant USEPA grant
RD-83479801 and NIEHS ES000002. References Angevine, W.M., Brioude, J.,
McKeen, S., Holloway, J.S., Lerner, B.M., Goldstein, A.H., Guha, A.,
Andrews, A., Nowak, J.B., Evan, S., others, 2013. Pollutant transport
among California regions. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 118, 6750e6763.
Beckerman, B.S., Jerrett, M., Martin, R.V., van Donkelaar, A., Ross, Z.,
Burnett, R.T., 2013. Application of the deletion/substitution/addition
algorithm to selecting land use regression models for interpolating air
pollution measurements in California. Atmos. Environ., 172e177. Census,
U.S., 2000. U.S. Census of Population and Housing. Chang, H.H., Hu, X.,
Liu, Y., 2013. Calibrating MODIS aerosol optical depth for predicting
daily PM2.5 concentrations via statistical downscaling. J. Expo. Sci.
Environ. Epidemiol., 398e404. Chudnovsky, A., Lyapustin, A., Wang, Y.,
Schwartz, J., Koutrakis, P., 2013a. Analyses of high resolution aerosol
data from MODIS satellite: a MAIAC retrieval, southern New England, US.
In: First International Conference on Remote Sensing and Geoinformation
of Environment. Int. Soc. Opt. Photonics, p. 87951E. Chudnovsky, A.A.,
Kostinski, A., Lyapustin, A., Koutrakis, P., 2013b. Spatial scales of
pollution from variable resolution satellite imaging. Environ. Pollut.
172, 131e138.

589

Chudnovsky, A.A., Koutrakis, P., Kloog, I., Melly, S., Nordio, F.,
Lyapustin, A., Wang, Y., Schwartz, J., 2014. Fine particulate matter
predictions using high resolution aerosol optical depth (AOD)
retrievals. Atmos. Environ., 189e198. Chudnovsky, A.A., Lee, H.J.,
Kostinski, A., Kotlov, T., Koutrakis, P., 2012. Prediction of daily ﬁne
particulate matter concentrations using aerosol optical depth retrievals
from the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES). J.
Air Waste Manag. Assoc. 62, 1022e1031. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
10962247.2012.695321. Cordero, L., Wu, Y., Gross, B.M., Moshary, F.,
2013. Assessing Satellite AOD Based and WRF/CMAQ Output PM2.5
Estimators. http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.2027430, pp. 872319e872319e18.
Dominici, F., Peng, R.D., Bell, M.L., Pham, L., McDermott, A., Zeger,
S.L., Samet, J.M., 2006. Fine particulate air pollution and hospital
admission for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. JAMA 295,
1127e1134. EPA, 2010. USEPA National Emissions Inventory. Gryparis, A.,
Paciorek, C.J., Zeka, A., Schwartz, J., Coull, B.A., 2009. Measurement
error caused by spatial misalignment in environmental epidemiology.
Biostat. Oxf. Engl. 10, 258e274.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxn033. Gupta, P., Khan, M.N.,
da Silva, A., Patadia, F., 2013. MODIS aerosol optical depth
observations over urban areas in. Atmos. Environ. 45, 27. Halonen, J.I.,
Lanki, T., Yli-Tuomi, T., Kulmala, M., Tiittanen, P., Pekkanen, J.,
2008. Urban air pollution, and asthma and COPD hospital emergency room
visits. Thorax 63, 635e641. Hoek, G., Beelen, R., de Hoogh, K.,
Vienneau, D., Gulliver, J., Fischer, P., Briggs, D., 2008. A review of
land-use regression models to assess spatial variation of outdoor air
pollution. Atmos. Environ. 42, 7561e7578. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2008.05.057. Homer, C., Huang, C., Yang, L., Wylie,
B., Coan, M., 2004. Development of a 2001 national landcover database
for the United States. Photogramm. Eng. Rem. Sens. 70, 829e840. Hu, X.,
Waller, L.A., Lyapustin, A., Wang, Y., Al-Hamdan, M.Z., Crosson, W.L.,
Estes Jr., M.G., Estes, S.M., Quattrochi, D.A., Puttaswamy, S.J., Liu,
Y., 2014. Estimating ground-level PM2.5 concentrations in the
Southeastern United States using MAIAC AOD retrievals and a two-stage
model. Remote Sens. Environ. 140, 220e232.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2013.08.032. Jerrett, M., Arain, A.,
Kanaroglou, P., Beckerman, B., Potoglou, D., Sahsuvaroglu, T., Morrison,
J., Giovis, C., 2005. A review and evaluation of intraurban air
pollution exposure models. J. Expo. Anal. Environ. Epidemiol. 15,
185e204. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.jea.7500388. Kim, M., Zhang, X.,
Holt, J.B., Liu, Y., 2013. Spatio-temporal variations in the
associations between hourly PM2.5 and aerosol optical depth (AOD) from
MODIS sensors on Terra and Aqua. Health (N. Y.) 5, 8e13. Kloog, I.,
Coull, B.A., Zanobetti, A., Koutrakis, P., Schwartz, J.D., 2012a. Acute
and chronic effects of particles on hospital admissions in New-England.
PLoS One 7, e34664. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0034664.
Kloog, I., Koutrakis, P., Coull, B.A., Lee, H.J., Schwartz, J., 2011.
Assessing temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for
epidemiological studies using satellite aerosol optical depth
measurements. Atmos. Environ. 45, 6267e6275.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2011.08.066. Kloog, I., Nordio, F.,
Coull, B.A., Schwartz, J., 2012b. Incorporating local land use
regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model of
spatiotemporal PM2.5 exposures in the Mid-Atlantic states. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 46, 11913e11921. Laden, F., Schwartz, J., Speizer, F.E.,
Dockery, D.W., 2006. Reduction in ﬁne particulate air pollution and
mortality: extended follow-up of the Harvard six cities study. Am. J.
Respir. Crit. Care Med. 173, 667e672. Lee, H.J., Liu, Y., Coull, B.A.,
Schwartz, J., Koutrakis, P., 2011. A novel calibration approach of MODIS
AOD data to predict PM2.5 concentrations. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 11,
7991e8002. Levy, R., Remer, L., Mattoo, S., Vermote, E., Kaufman, Y.,
2007. Second-generation operational algorithm: retrieval of aerosol
properties over land from inversion of Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer spectral reﬂectance. J. Geophys. Res. 112, 1984e2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2006JD007811. Lin, G., Fu, J., Jiang, D., Hu,
W., Dong, D., Huang, Y., Zhao, M., 2013. Spatio-temporal variation of
PM2.5 concentrations and their relationship with geographic and
socioeconomic factors in China. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 11,
173e186. Liu, Y., Paciorek, C.J., Koutrakis, P., 2009. Estimating
regional spatial and temporal variability of PM2.5 concentrations using
satellite data, meteorology, and land use information. Environ. Health
Perspect. 117, 886e892. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1289/ehp.0800123.
Lyapustin, A., Martonchik, J., Wang, Y., Laszlo, I., Korkin, S., 2011a.
Multiangle implementation of atmospheric correction (MAIAC): 1.
Radiative transfer basis and look-up tables. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos.
116, 1984e2012. Lyapustin, A., Wang, Y., Laszlo, I., Kahn, R., Korkin,
S., Remer, L., Levy, R., Reid, J.S., 2011b. Multiangle implementation of
atmospheric correction (MAIAC): 2. Aerosol algorithm. J. Geophys. Res.
Atmos. 116, 1984e2012. Maune, D., 2007. Digital Elevation Model
Technologies and Applications: the DEM Users Manual. American Society
for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Maune, DF. NOAA, 2010. NCEP/NCAR
Reanalysis 1 (WWW Document). URL. http://www.esrl.
noaa.gov/psd/data/gridded/data.ncep.reanalysis.html (accessed
29.01.14.). Nordio, F., Kloog, I., Coull, B.A., Chudnovsky, A., Grillo,
P., Bertazzi, P.A., Baccarelli, A.A., Schwartz, J., 2013. Estimating
spatio-temporal resolved PM10 aerosol mass concentrations using MODIS
satellite data and land use regression

590

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 95 (2014) 581e590

over Lombardy, Italy. Atmos. Environ. 74, 227e236.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.atmosenv.2013.03.043. Oke, T.R., 1987.
Boundary Layer Climates. Psychology Press. Peacock, J.L., Anderson,
H.R., Bremner, S.A., Marston, L., Seemungal, T.A., Strachan, D.P.,
Wedzicha, J.A., 2011. Outdoor air pollution and respiratory health in
patients with COPD. Thorax 66, 591e596. , D., Mattoo, S., Chu, D.A.,
Martins, J.V., Li, R.-R., Remer, L.A., Kaufman, Y.J., Tanre Ichoku, C.,
Levy, R.C., Kleidman, R.G., Eck, T.F., Vermote, E., Holben, B.N., 2005.
The MODIS aerosol algorithm, products, and validation. J. Atmos. Sci.
62, 947e973. Samet, J., Zeger, S., Dominici, F., Curriero, F., Coursac,
I., Dockery, D., Schwartz, J., Zanobetti, A., 2000. The national
morbidity, mortality, and air pollution study. Part II Morb. Mortal. Air
Pollut. U.S. Res. Rep. Health Eff. Inst. 94, 5e70. Sampson, P.D.,
Richards, M., Szpiro, A.A., Bergen, S., Sheppard, L., Larson, T.V.,
Kaufman, J.D., 2013. A regionalized national universal kriging model
using partial least squares regression for estimating annual PM2.5
concentrations in epidemiology. Atmos. Environ. 75, 383e392. Schwartz,
J., 1996. Air pollution and hospital admissions for respiratory disease.
Epidemiology 7, 20e28.

TIGER, 2006. Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and
Referencing System. Vienneau, D., De Hoogh, K., Beelen, R., Fischer, P.,
Hoek, G., Briggs, D., 2010. Comparison of land-use regression models
between Great Britain and the Netherlands. Atmos. Environ. 44, 688e696.
Yanosky, J.D., Paciorek, C.J., Suh, H.H., 2008. Predicting chronic ﬁne
and coarse particulate exposures using spatio-temporal models for the
northeastern and midwestern US. Environ. Health Perspect., 522e529.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ ehp.11692. Yap, X.Q., Hashim, M., 2013. A
robust calibration approach for PM10 prediction from MODIS aerosol
optical depth. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 13, 3517e3526. Zanobetti, A.,
Schwartz, J., 2009. The effect of ﬁne and coarse particulate air
pollution on mortality: a national analysis. Environ. Health Perspect.
117, 898e903. http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0800108. Zeger, S.L.,
Thomas, D., Dominici, F., Samet, J.M., Schwartz, J., Dockery, D., Cohen,
A., 2000. Exposure measurement error in time-series studies of air
pollution: concepts and consequences. Environ. Health Perspect. 108,
419e426.


