Chronobiology International, 26(1): 108--125, (2009) Copyright # Informa
Healthcare USA, Inc. ISSN 0742-0528 print/1525-6073 online DOI:
10.1080/07420520802694020

GLOBAL CO-DISTRIBUTION OF LIGHT AT NIGHT (LAN) AND CANCERS OF PROSTATE,
COLON, AND LUNG IN MEN

Itai Kloog,1 Abraham Haim,2 Richard G. Stevens,3 and Boris A. Portnov1 1

Department of Natural Resources & Environmental Management, Faculty of
Social Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel 2 Departments of
Biology & Evolutionary and Environmental Biology, University of Haifa,
Haifa, Israel 3 University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut, USA

The incidence rates of cancers in men differ by countries of the world.
We compared the incidence rates of three of the most common cancers
(prostate, lung, and colon) in men residing in 164 different countries
with the population-weighted light at night (LAN) exposure and with
several developmental and environmental indicators, including per capita
income, percent urban population, and electricity consumption. The
estimate of per capita LAN exposure was a novel aspect of this study.
Both ordinary least squares (OLS) and spatial error (SE) regression
models were used in the analysis. We found a significant positive
association between population exposure to LAN and incidence rates of
prostate cancer, but no such association with lung cancer or colon
cancer. The prostate cancer result is consistent with a biological
theory and a limited number of previous studies of circadian disruption
and risk. The LAN-prostate cancer connection is postulated to be due to
suppression of melatonin and/or disruption of clock gene function. An
analysis holding other variables at average values across the 164
countries yielded a risk of prostate cancer in the highest LAN-exposed
countries 110% higher than in the lowest LAN exposed countries. This
observed association is a necessary condition for a potentially large
effect of LAN on risk of prostate cancer. However, it is not sufficient
due to potential confounding by factors that increase the risk of
prostate cancer and are also associated with LAN among the studied
countries. (Author correspondence: portnov@nrem.haifa.ac.il) Keywords
Prostate cancer, Epidemiology, Geography, Incidence rates, LAN

Submitted July 8, 2008, Returned for revision August 21, 2008, Accepted
October 2, 2008 Address correspondence to Prof. Boris A. Portnov,
Department of Natural Resources & Environmental Management, Faculty of
Social Sciences, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, 31905, Haifa,
Israel. Tel.: 972-4-8288532; Fax: 972-4-8249971; E-mail:
portnov@nrem.haifa.ac.il

108

Co-Distribution of LAN and Cancers in Men

109

INTRODUCTION Male cancer rates tend to vary worldwide, showing high
incidence rates in some countries and relatively low ones in others.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), prostate cancer is the
most common cancer in men, with some 245,000 males succumbing to it
annually worldwide (American Cancer Society, 2007). In Bangladesh, its
age-standardized rate (ASR) does not exceed 0.3 per 100,000, while in
the United States, it reaches 124.8 per 100,000. The second most common
cancer in men (and with a greater mortality) is lung cancer, which shows
a similar variation of ASRs. In Fiji, lung cancer ASR does not exceed
0.5, while in Hungary, it is 94.6 cases per 100,000 (see Figure 1).

FIGURE 1 Worldwide distribution of (a) prostate and (b) lung cancers
(age-standardized rates per 10,000 residents). Mapped using data from
the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC; Parkin et al.,
2005).

110

I. Kloog et al.

A comprehensive study of global differences in cancer rates has been
conducted by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC; see
Parkin et al., 2001a, 2001b, 2005). During this ongoing research, the
estimates of prevalence, mortality, and incidence of the 26 most common
cancers were collected for 20 geographic regions of the world. Although
the IARC study is apparently the most comprehensive analysis of global
patterns of cancer morbidity and mortality carried out to date, it does
not discuss in detail the possible risk factors and their association
with cancer rates. Although several population-level studies of cancer
risk factors have been carried out, most of these studies were focused
on specific cancers (such as breast and liver cancers) and mainly among
women (Althuis et al., 2005; Bonner et al., 2005; Bray et al., 2004;
Brody et al., 2007; Kloog et al., 2008). The present study attempts to
investigate the relationships between light at night (LAN) and the
incidence of the three most common cancers in men worldwide (i.e.,
prostrate, lung, and colon cancer), using age-standardized rates (ASR)
of male cancers available for 164 countries. This new analysis is an
extension of previous work showing a significant co-distribution of LAN
and breast cancer in women in Israel (Kloog et al., 2008). Several other
population-level variables that are thought to have an effect on cancer
risk are also included in the analysis. Our a priori hypothesis was that
LAN would be significantly associated with risk of prostate but not lung
cancer in men. To the best of our knowledge, this study is a novel one
and the first of its kind to link worldwide male cancer rates and
various risk factors (including exposure to LAN) on a global level. The
results of population level, or ecological, studies are important in
providing context for studies in subpopulations of people using
casecontrol and cohort designs. If no association is found at the
population level in a study with good statistical power, then that would
be evidence against a strong effect of a putative risk factor. A
positive association is a necessary precondition for there to be a wide
effect in society at large, taking into account the accepted statistical
tools used in epidemiology studies. We predicted an association of LAN
with prostate cancer based on a biological theory (Stevens et al., 2007)
and limited epidemiology (Conlon et al., 2007; Kakizaki et al., 2008;
Kubo et al., 2006), but no association with lung cancer. RESEARCH METHOD
Cancer Data The data on cancer ASRs in men were obtained from the
GLOBOCAN 2002 database, maintained by the IARC (Parkin et al., 2005).
ASR is a

Co-Distribution of LAN and Cancers in Men

111

summary measure of a rate that a world population would have if it had a
standard age structure (Parkin et al., 2005) and is calculated per
100,000 residents per year. The cancer data for 2002, the most recent
data available, were used in the study. Data were obtained for the three
most common cancers in men---prostate, lung, and colon---which worldwide
account for about 38% of all new cases of cancer in men annually
(American Cancer Society, 2007). The conduct of this study conformed to
the ethical standards of this journal (Portaluppi et al., 2008).
Explanatory Variables Descriptive statistics of the research variables
used in the analysis are presented in Appendix A. GDP per Capita GDP per
capita ($US) is a commonly used measure of population welfare that
reflects differences in the diet and lifestyles of different
socio-economic strata (Hulshof et al., 1991, 2003). As several previous
studies indicated, cancer rates tend to be higher among high income than
across low income strata and are significantly higher in developed than
in developing countries (American Cancer Society, 2006; Bray et al.,
2004). LAN Emission According to several recent studies, excessive
exposure to LAN may be a risk factor for developing certain cancers
(Anisimov 2006; Haus, 2007; Kloog et al., 2008; Stevens, 2005; Verkasalo
et al., 1999) hypothesized to be affected by circadian disruption. A
variety of mechanisms have been proposed, including suppression of
melatonin (MLT) secretion by the pineal gland leading to increased tumor
growth (Blask et al., 2005), depression of immune and thermoregulatory
functions (Haim et al., 2005; Nelson, 2004), and/or direct disruption of
clock gene function in the suprachaismatic nuclei leading to alterations
in cell-cycle regulation (Stevens & Rea, 2001). The LAN variable was
thus used to explore whether country-specific cancer rates tend to
increase with exposure to LAN. Using simple average country LAN exposure
estimates may result in a bias, caused by a country's differences in
geography and population structure. For instance, if simple country-wide
LAN averages are calculated, large and unevenly populated countries,
such as Canada and Australia, are likely to exhibit very low average
levels of LAN. To minimize this bias, we used a novel method of
calculating LAN exposure, which took into account both a country's
geographic distribution of population

112

I. Kloog et al.

and its local LAN intensities (see the subsection on GIS analysis for
more detail). Percent Urban Population Living in cities is often
associated with a considerable amount of physiological stress as a
consequence of high residential densities, traffic congestion, and air
pollution, which may increase cancer risk (Han & Naeher, 2006). In
addition, residents of urban areas are exposed to more environmental,
second-hand smoking due to high residential densities, which is another
cause of cancer (Volzke et al., 2006). Dietary differences and reduced
physical activity associated with urban living may also play a role in
the development of cancer. Electricity Consumption (kWh per Capita)
Electricity consumption may be an indicator of socio-economic
development and industrial emission of gaseous substances associated
with electricity production (Gram-Hansenn & Petersen, 2004; Jumbe,
2004). Per capita electricity consumption may also serve as a proxy for
electromagnetic field exposure (EMF) exposure, which, although
controversial as a causal agent, could be a possible risk factor for the
development of cancer (Davis et al., 2006; Demers et al., 1991; Roosli
et al., 2007). Regional Indicators Our preliminary examination of cancer
distribution maps (see Figure 1) revealed clusters of countries with
quite similar cancer rates (e.g., East Asia is a clear example of such
clustering). In order to take this ASR clustering into account, several
dichotomous variables (termed “regional indicators”) were included in
the analysis as additional predictors: Middle East, Africa, East Europe,
Asia, South America, and Middle Asia. Each indicator takes on value 1 if
a country is located in a particular geographic region and zero
otherwise (such as in North America, Australia, and Western Europe).
Data Sources Data for the present analysis were obtained from the two
main sources. Country-level data on per capita GDP, percent urban
population, and per capita electricity consumption for 1998-- 1999 were
obtained from the ESRI ArcGIS TM database and the CIA World Fact Book
(Central Intelligence Agency, 2006; ESRI, 2007). Data on nighttime
illumination (LAN) were obtained from the U.S. Defense Meteorological
Satellite Program

Co-Distribution of LAN and Cancers in Men

113

(DMSP, 2004). The DMSP satellite provides continuous reading of the
entire Earth surface during the nighttime as it cycles around the globe.
The satellite image for 1996/97, used in the analysis, was constructed
by the DMSP by averaging daily readings of the satellite sensors and
removing cloud cover. GIS Analysis In recent years, Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) have become an important research tool for
cancer-related studies (Banerjee et al., 2003; Kloog et al., 2008;
Krieger et al., 2002; Maheswaran et al., 2002; O'Leary et al., 2004;
Scott et al., 2002). In these studies, GIS is used to calculate the
distance between residences and hazardous waste sites, as well as to
account for the spatial clustering and variation of cancer cases and to
capture spatio-temporal heterogeneity in survival patterns. In the
present study, GIS technology was used for matching country-specific
cancer rates with the LAN levels obtained from satellite images. The
task was performed using the “spatial join” tool in the ArcGIS 9TM
software, which joins data from two geographic layers by appending
attributes from one layer to another, based on the relative location of
features in the layers (Minami & ESRI, 2000). The “spatial join” was
performed in two steps. In the first step, a worldwide
radiance-calibrated satellite image of nighttime illumination, which
reports average nightlight intensity in 1996/97 measured in light
radiance units (i.e., nanowatts/cm2/sr), was imported to the ArcGIS 9TM
software. The image reflects a fraction of light escaped into the space
and detected by the satellite's sensors. Although these satellite
measurements are a magnitude lower than actual LAN levels detected on
the ground, they represent accurately the relative levels of nightlight
intensity observed in the localities (DMSP, 2004). The original image
size was 43,200 by 21,600 pixels, with an average pixel size of about
350  350 meters. The geostatistical tools available in GIS for working
with raster (pixel) images are rather limited. Therefore, for the
consequent analysis, the original nighttime illumination image was
converted into a vector map using the ArcGIS 9TM “raster-to-feature”
conversion tool. The conversion resulted in a polygon layer (i.e., map)
containing approximately 3,800,000 polygons characterized by various LAN
intensities, with a minimum LAN value of 0 (no illumination) and a
maximum value of 255 nanowatts/cm2/sr (maximum illumination). The
polygon layer thereby obtained was overlapped with a map showing the
location of all major populated places (.1,000 residents) of the world
obtained from the Geonames database (Geonames, 2008). In the next step,
average LAN values were calculated for each populated place i by
obtaining LAN values from the LAN intensity polygon into

114

I. Kloog et al.

which the populated place i fell. The locality-specific LAN values
(LANi) obtained were then multiplied by the population size of
localities (POPi) and summed for each country j under study. Next, these
summary values were divided by the total population size of the
country's populated places (SPOPij) to obtain the average LAN exposure
estimate per person (LANj ) in each country ( j ) under study (see
Appendix 2): LAN j ¼

n X

LANij  POPij =

i¼0

n X

POPij

i¼0

where n is the total number of populated places in country j.
Statistical Analysis To identify and measure the significance of factors
affecting the selected cancer rates, several statistical techniques were
used. First, we started with an ordinary least squares (OLS) model.
During the analysis, multicollinearity and normality were tested, and
their results were found satisfactory (tolerance . 0.4). (The tolerance
statistic estimates the degree of inter-collinearity between independent
variables; its values vary between 0 and 1, with values approaching zero
indicating that a strong multicollinearity may be present. In
econometric studies, tolerance values greater than 0.1 are considered to
be satisfactory [Kinnear & Gray, 2007]. The tolerance value of 0.4 is
considerably higher than 0.1, thus indicating that the multicollinearity
between the explanatory variables is well within acceptable limits.) The
analysis was performed separately for all cancer types using the
following linear model: Cancer incidence rate ¼ B0ðconstantÞ þ B1
ðelectricity consumptionÞ þ B2 ðGDP per capitaÞ þ B3 ðLANÞ þ B4 ð
percent of urban populationÞ þ B5 ðMiddle EastÞ þ B6 ðAfricaÞ þ B7
ðEast EuropeÞ þ B8 ðAsiaÞ þ B9 ðSouth AmericaÞ þ 10 ðMiddle AsiaÞ and
þ 1 ðrandom error termÞ where B0, . . . , B10 are regression
coefficients. During the analysis, several other functional forms of the
model (e.g., log-linear and double-log forms) were tested, and only the
results of the best performing (linear) model are reported in the
following discussion. The residuals of the OLS model were tested for the
presence of spatial autocorrelation using the Moran's I test statistic.
The test

Co-Distribution of LAN and Cancers in Men

115

showed significant clustering of residuals (Z-Moran's I ¼ 0.535 --
4.372, p , 0.001), which necessitated the use of spatial dependency (SD)
models to take the spatial dependency of residuals into account and
improve the robustness of regression estimates (Anselin, 1999). The
spatial error regression tests were performed using the GeoDaTM spatial
analysis software. In addition to standard statistical tools, GeoDaTM
includes a range of spatial autocorrelation tools, which take into
account the degree of spatial dependency between neighboring
observations (Anselin et al., 2005). In recent years, spatial
auto-correlation (SAC) and spatial autoregression (SAR) analysis has
gained momentum in ecological and epidemiology studies (Clayton et al.,
1993; Portnov et al., 2007; Rezaeian et al., 2006). SAC/SAR techniques
help to examine the relationship between a value of a variable at one
location and nearby values of the same variable, making it possible to
accommodate spatial dependency effects in conventional linear
statistical models (Griffith, 2003). RESULTS Table 1 shows the risk
factors affecting leading male cancer rates. All models in Table 1 are
OLS models, estimated separately for the following three cancer types:
prostate, lung, and colon. The models appear to provide a very good fit
(R2 ¼ 0.762-- 0.785) and have a high degree of generality (F ¼ 38.240--
55.940, p , 0.001). As expected, per capita GDP (ln) is positively
associated with ASRs across all models (see Table 1). Only lung cancer
appears to exhibit a significantly positive association between ASR and
percent country's urban population. Among the three cancers analyzed,
only prostate cancer exhibited a significant positive correlation with
LAN exposure (b ¼ 0.150, t ¼ 2.916, p , 0.01) and per capita electricity
consumption (b ¼ 0.012, t ¼ 3.683; p , 0.01). Notably, in most models,
regional indicators emerged as highly significant ( p , 0.01), thus
indicating that cancer rates do appear to cluster regionally. Thus, for
example, in the case of prostate cancer, regional indicators for Africa,
Middle East, Eastern Europe, Central Europe, and Asia exhibited a
negative sign, implying that in these regions prostate cancer ASRs
appear to be significantly lower than in Western Europe and North
America. In contrast, lung cancer rates in Eastern Europe appear to be
higher than elsewhere, as indicated by significant positive signs of
their regional indicators ( p , 0.01). This may be due to a having large
share of traditional industries and widespread tobacco smoking. Because
most models exhibited significant Z-Moran's I values (0.535 -- 4.746, p
, 0.001; see Table 1), thus showing a spatial dependency of regression
residuals, spatial error (SE) regression was conducted. The

TABLE 1 Factors affecting male cancer rates (method: OLS regression)
Prostate Variable

116

(Constant) Electricity consumption per capita (kWh) GDP per capita (ln),
$US Light at night (nanowatts/cm2/sr) Urban population (%) Middle East
Africa East Europe Central Asia Eastern Asia South America Number of
observations‡ R2 R2 adjusted F§ Z-Moran'sk 

B 3.934 0.012 5.425 0.150 20.032 240.834 224.035 225.771 238.657
240.553 22.908 164 0.762 0.747 49.106 0.535

regression coefficient t-statistic ‡ number of valid observations
list-wise § standard error of the estimate k Spatial dependency of
regression residuals index # indicates a 0.05 significance level 
indicates a 0.01 significance level †

Lung t† 0.269 3.683 3.258 2.916 20.502 29.651 24.871 25.819
27.351 28.798 20.695

B

Colon t†

B

t†

211.809 0.006

20.882 1.836

220.724 0.003

22.424# 1.499

4.364 20.076 0.192 218.649 221.594 25.102 23.680 27.102 216.553 164
0.763 0.748 49.365 2.720

2.858 21.608 3.304 24.808 24.774 6.183 20.763 21.681 24.313

5.769 20.040 0.020 219.868 216.243 5.019 217.948 212.900 215.136 164
0.785 0.771 55.940 4.746

5.920 21.327 0.537 28.024 25.626 1.936 25.832 24.782 26.177

TABLE 2 Factors affecting male cancer rates (method: spatial error
model) Prostate Variable

117

(Constant) Electricity consumption per capita (kWh) GDP per capita (ln),
$US Light at night (nanowatts/cm2/sr) Urban population (%) Middle East
Africa East Europe Central Asia Eastern Asia South America l (lambda)k
Number of observations‡ R2 SEE§ Log likelihood 

regression coefficient z-value ‡ number of valid observations list-wise
§ standard error of the estimate k spatial autoregressive coefficient #
indicates a 0.05 significance level  indicates a 0.001 significance †

Lung

Colon

B

t†

B

t†

B

t†

3.951 0.012 5.417 0.154 20.032 240.863 223.961 225.809 238.751 240.557
23.036 20.043 164 0.762 11.566 2634.193

0.281 3.728 3.389 3.156 20.530 210.207 25.098 26.143
27.765 29.240 20.766 20.399

215.010 0.003 3.831 0.024 0.119 26.094 210.349 11.960 27.049 1.923
21.052 0.971 164 0.807 9.567 2607.954

21.132 1.935 2.649 0.450 2.349# 20.944 21.611 2.021# 21.011 0.385
20.193 118.618

214.310 0.003 4.917 20.027 0.005 220.115 214.053 11.341 213.524 29.496
28.011 0.876 164 0. 825 6.282 2537.928

21.694 2.483# 5.309 20.814 0.183 25.103 23.548 3.109 23.174
23.018 22.345# 31.135

118

I. Kloog et al.

results are reported in Table 2. Although the SE models provide better
fits than the OLS ones (R2 ¼ 0.762 -- 0.785, see Table 1; vs. R2 ¼ 0.762
-- 0.825; see Table 2), they indicate the same trends as the OLS models,
that is, a positive association of most ASR with GDP per capita and the
same relationships with LAN and electricity consumption as in the OLS
model. Although throughout the analysis, the multicollinearity of
research variables was tested and found within tolerable limits
(tolerance . 0.4), even this relatively low level of multi-collinearity
may bias regression estimates. Therefore, we used the stepwise multiple
regression (SMR) method to include only statistically significant
variables in the resulting model. (The SMR method is not used in spatial
auto-correlation analysis, and the stepwise selection of predictors was
not performed for constructing spatial dependency models.) The results
are reported in Table 3. Similar to the previously reported model, LAN,
electricity consumption, and per capita GDP emerged as the key factors
affecting prostate cancer rates ( p , 0.01); per capita GDP and percent
urban population were the key factors in the lung cancer model ( p ,
0.01); and per capita GDP is a key determinants of colon cancer rates (
p , 0.01). All regional indicator variables exhibited a negative
association with all cancer types, apart from those of East Europe, for
which regional indicators exhibited a significant positive association
with both lung and colon cancers. To estimate the relative contribution
of LAN to prostate cancer ASRs, we split all the countries in our sample
into three groups: countries with minimal LAN exposure (less than 15
nanowatts/cm2/sr), countries with average LAN exposure (15--57
nanowatts/cm2/sr), and countries with the highest LAN exposure (greater
than 57 nanowatts/cm2/sr). The Jenks “natural breaks” method of the
ArcGIS9TM software was used to classify countries into the groups. This
method determines the best arrangement of values into classes by
comparing the sum of squared differences of values from the means of
their classes, and thus identifies “break points” in the data values by
picking the class breaks that best group similar values and maximize the
differences between classes (Minami & ESRI, 2000). Next, the values of
all other variables (apart from LAN) were set constant to the average
values observed in each group, and a sensitivity test of prostate cancer
ASRs to changes in LAN values was run, using the “prostate cancer” model
reported in Table 1. The results of the sensitivity test are reported in
Table 4. As Table 4 shows, with the values of all other variables fixed,
the increase of LAN from 8.60 nanowatts/cm2/sr (the average LAN value in
the group of countries with minimal LAN exposure) to 28.95
nanowatts/cm2/sr (countries with average LAN exposure) corresponds to an
increase of 30.5% in prostate cancer ASR. A further increase in LAN
value to 99.21 (the maximum LAN exposure) corresponds to an increase of
80.2% in prostate cancer ASR.

TABLE 3 Factors affecting male cancer rates (method: SMR analysis)
Prostate Variable

119

(Constant) Electricity consumption per capita (kWh) GDP per capita
(ln),$US Light at night (nanowatts/cm2/sr ) Urban population (%) Middle
East Africa East Europe Central Asia Eastern Asia Latin America Number
of observations‡ R2 R2 adjusted F§ 

regression coefficient z-value ‡ number of valid observations list-wise
§ standard error of the estimate k indicates a 0.05 significance level #
indicates a 0.001 significance †

Lung

Colon

B

t†

B

t†

B

t†

20.266 0.013 5.468 0.160 --- 239.599 221.327 224.069 236.100 238.180 ---
164 0.761 0.749 61.777#

20.023 3.758# 4.132# 3.224# --- 211.820# 26.318# 27.062# 28.985#
210.889# ---

20.000 --- 4.821 --- 0.207 216.899 217.218 28.552 --- --- 213.092 164
0.752 0.742 19.303#

22.144k --- 3.804# --- 3.566# 25.313# 26.476# 9.210# --- --- 24.839#

221.617 --- 5.957 --- --- 219.800 215.946 5.685 217.522 212.251 214.633
164 0.779 0.770 78.778#

22.598# --- 7.167# --- --- 28.274# 25.604# 2.270k 25.776# 24.707#
26.224#

120

I. Kloog et al.

TABLE 4 Sensitivity test of prostate cancer ASR to plausible changes in
the ground LAN intensity

LAN level

Average LAN value (nanowatts/cm2/sr)

Estimated ACR (per 100,000 residents)

Percent change

8.60 28.95 99.21

66.77 87.11 157.01

--- 30.5% 80.2%

Low Medium High

The values of the fixed variables were fixed as follows: GDP per capita
¼ $US 9,000 (the average value for the “high resource” countries under
study), urban population ¼ 65.3%, and electricity consumption per capita
¼ 131.870 kWh. In addition, all regional indicators were set to 0 (that
is, ASRs are estimated for the “high resource” [i.e., developed]
countries).

DISCUSSION There are considerable regional differences in cancer ASRs in
men. While countries in Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and Eastern
Europe (considered “low resource” areas) exhibit relatively low cancer
rates, most developed countries exhibit very high rates of cancer in
men. These differences may be due to a variety of factors, including
differences in genetic background, economic status, diet, amount of
physical activities, obesity, exposure to environmental pollutants, and
medical care, among others. As our analysis indicates, the relative risk
of contracting cancer is positively associated with average income of
local residents (American Cancer Society, 2006; Bray et al., 2004).
Part, but not all, of this excess is probably due to better access to
medical and diagnostic procedures in the “high resource” societies
(Bradley et al., 2002; Madison et al., 2004; Wells & Horm, 1992). In
addition, there appears to be a positive association between income,
urban population, and ASRs of lung cancer. This association may be
attributed to the fact that people living in urban areas are more
exposed to air pollution emanating from industries and motor vehicles,
as well as to environmental (second-hand) smoking, due to high
residential densities. We found a significant positive association
between exposure to LAN, electricity consumption, and prostate cancer. A
similar association between LAN exposure and breast cancer in women was
reported in previous studies (Anisimov, 2006; Kloog et al., 2008;
Stevens, 2005; Stevens & Rea, 2001; Stevens et al., 2007; Verkasalo et
al., 1999). There is, of course, the potential for confounding by known
and unknown factors for which we could not adjust. However, for this to
have occurred, the relative risk associated with the confounder would
have to be very high, and the confounder would also have to be tightly
correlated with LAN exposure in the localities studied (Blair et al.,
2007). The estimate of per capita LAN exposure was a novel aspect of
this study. This estimate was calculated as the average LAN exposure per
person in each country under study. If there were no considerable

Co-Distribution of LAN and Cancers in Men

121

misbalance between proportional shares of male and female populations in
localities, the index in question provides a fairly unbiased LAN
exposure estimate for both men and women. Although there have been some
animal experiments (Anisimov et al., 1997) and epidemiological research
(Schernhammer et al., 2003) suggesting there might be an association
between LAN exposure, circadian disruptions, and low MLT levels and
colon cancer, the number of such studies is small and do not seem to be
sufficient for drawing general conclusion on an association between LAN
and colon cancer. The lack of any association between LAN and colon
cancer in men in this study may add evidence that LAN is probably not a
major risk factor at the population level. Due to limitations on data
availability, other risk factors, including occupation, alcohol
consumption, smoking, and additional factors could not be addressed by
the analysis, though the per capita income variable may capture some of
their effects. In addition, it should be noted that dynamics of
population movement as well as behavioral patterns that limit exposure
to LAN were also not covered by the study due to unavailable data. Such
information can be obtained by studies carried out on a smaller scale,
such as localities within an urban space, but not on a global level.
Another potential limitation is in the completeness of cancer detection
and registration in developing counties where LAN exposure is low.
Parkin et al. (2001c) conducted a detailed analysis of cancer
registration in Kampala, Uganda, over a period of 1994 to 1996, and
concluded that “it gives reassurance that published incidence rates are
reasonably accurate.” In many cases, environmental health problems are
better addressed by large-scale population level studies than by
individual-level investigations, due to the occurrence of a large number
of low-level exposures (Pekkanen & Pearce, 2001). However, a substantial
drawback of population-level studies is that those associations that
occur at an aggregated level may be subject to ecological confounding or
fallacy (Robinson, 1958; Selvin, 1958). Several techniques were used to
reduce the possibility of ecological confounding, including grouping by
geographic areas and adjusting for some potential confounders, such as
income levels (GDP per capita) and percent urban population, which among
other things reflects population density (Elliot, 1996; Morgenstern &
Thomas, 1993). Because the results of the present study are specific for
cancer in men, future studies should include a comparison of the results
to a similar study done with female cancer rates. Other risk factors,
such as diet, smoking habits, alcohol consumption, and family and work
history, which were missing from our analysis due to lack of available
data, should also be considered and added to the analysis in future
studies. Information on these factors might enable a more precise
estimate of the association of nocturnal light level and risk of cancer.
In addition, as noted above, if any of these

122

I. Kloog et al.

factors is very strongly related to risk and also with light level, then
estimates of the association of light level and risk might change. To
the best of our knowledge, the present analysis is the first to identify
the relationship between LAN and the incidence of the most common
cancers in men on a worldwide basis. DECLARATION OF INTEREST The authors
report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for
the content and writing of the paper. APPENDIX A TABLE A1 Descriptive
statistics of the research variables

Variable Dependent variables Colorectal cancer Lung cancer Prostate
cancer Explanatory variables Electricity consumption per capita GDP per
capita Light at night Urban population  †

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard deviation

ASR per 100,000† ASR per 100,000† ASR per 100,000†

1.00 0.05 0.30

58.50 94.60 124.80

16.08 25.47 26.47

14.65 21.86 23.80

kWh per capita

0.01

3367.42

75.66

295.29

US$ Nanowatts/cm2/sr % of residents living in urban areas

463 0.00 6.16

32021 143.34 100.00

6545.73 8.23 55.16

7315.17 22.43 23.31

Measurement unit

Total number of cases ¼ 164 Age-standardized rates per 100,000 residents
per year

APPENDIX B TABLE A2 Average LAN exposure in selected countries

Country Nepal Laos India Guatemala Egypt Argentina Israel United States

Average LAN exposure per person (nanowatts/cm2/sr) 0.002 0.038 0.059
0.451 2.028 4.501 10.707 57.540

Co-Distribution of LAN and Cancers in Men

123

REFERENCES Althuis MD, Dozier JM, Anderson WF, Devesa SS, Brinton LA.
(2005). Global trends in breast cancer incidence and mortality
1973--1997. Int. J. Epidemiol. 34:405--412. American Cancer Society.
(2006). Breast cancer risk factors and prevention. Available at:
http://www.
cancer.org/docroot/CRI/content/CRI\_2\_4\_2X\_What\_are\_the\_risk\_factors\_for\_breast\_cancer\_5.
asp. Accessed June 15. American Cancer Society. (2007). Global cancer
facts and figures. Available at http://www.cancer.org/
docroot/STT/content/STT\_1x\_Global\_Cancer\_Facts\_and\_Figures\_2007.asp.
Accessed February 15, 2008. Anisimov VN. (2006). Light pollution,
reproductive function and cancer risk. Neuro. Endocrinol. Lett.
27:35--52. Anisimov VN, Popovich IG, Zabezhinski MA. (1997). Melatonin
and colon carcinogenesis: I. Inhibitory effect of melatonin on
development of intestinal tumors induced by 1,2-dimethylhydrazine in
rats. Carcinogenesis 18:1549--1553. Anselin L. (1999). Spatial
econometrics. Bruton Center, School of Social Sciences, University of
Texas at Dallas, 35 pp. Anselin L, Syabri I, Kho Y. (2005). GeoDa: An
introduction to spatial data analysis. Geographical Analysis 38:5--22.
Banerjee S, Wall MM, Carlin BP. (2003). Frailty modeling for spatially
correlated survival data, with application to infant mortality in
Minnesota. Biostatistics 4:123--142. Blair A, Stewart P, Lubin JH,
Forastiere F. (2007). Methodological issues regarding confounding and
exposure misclassification in epidemiological studies of occupational
exposures. Am. J. Ind. Med. 50:199--207. Blask DE, Brainard GC, Dauchy
RT, Hanifin JP, Davidson LK, Krause JA, Sauer LA, RiveraBermudez MA,
Dubocovich ML, Jasser SA, Lynch DT, Rollag MD, Zalatan F. (2005).
Melatonindepleted blood from premenopausal women exposed to light at
night stimulates growth of human breast cancer xenografts in nude rats.
Cancer Res. 65:11174--11184. Bonner MR, Nie J, Han D, Vena JE, Rogerson
P, Muti P, Trevisan M, Edge SE, Freudenheim JL. (2005). Secondhand smoke
exposure in early life and the risk of breast cancer among never smokers
(United States). Cancer Causes Control 16:683--689. Bradley CJ, Given
CW, Roberts C. (2002). Race, socioeconomic status, and breast cancer
treatment and survival. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 94:490--496. Bray F,
McCarron P, Parkin DM. (2004). The changing global patterns of female
breast cancer incidence and mortality. Breast Cancer Res. 6:229--239.
Brody JG, Moysich KB, Humblet O, Attfield KR, Beehler GP, Rudel RA.
(2007). Environmental pollutants and breast cancer: Epidemiologic
studies. Cancer 109:2667 --2711. Central Intelligence Agency. (2006).
CIA world factbook Available at: http://www.cia.gov/index.html. Accessed
December 2006. Clayton DG, Bernardinelli L, Montomoli C. (1993). Spatial
correlation in ecological analysis. Int. J. Epidemiol. 22:1193--1202.
Conlon M, Lightfoot N, Kreiger N. (2007). Rotating shift work and risk
of prostate cancer. Epidemiology 18:182--183. Davis S, Mirick DK, Chen
C, Stanczyk FZ. (2006). Effects of 60-Hz magnetic field exposure on
nocturnal 6-sulfatoxymelatonin, estrogens, luteinizing hormone, and
follicle-stimulating hormone in healthy reproductive-age women: Results
of a crossover trial. Ann. Epidemiol. 16:622-- 631. Demers PA, Thomas
DB, Rosenblatt KA, Jimenez LM, McTiernan A, Stalsberg H, Stemhagen A,
Thompson WD, Curnen MG, Satariano W, et al. (1991). Occupational
exposure to electromagnetic fields and breast cancer in men. Am. J.
Epidemiol. 134(4):340--347. DMSP. (2004). DMSP nighttime lights data.
Available at: http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/. Accessed November 2004.
Elliot P. (1996). Geographical and environmental epidemiology: Methods
for small area studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 382 pp. ESRI.
(2007). ArcGIS 9.2. Redlands, Calif.: ESRI. Geonames. (2008). World
database Available at: http://download.geonames.org/export/. Accessed
February 1, 2008.

124

I. Kloog et al.

Gram-Hansenn K, Petersen NK. (2004). Different everyday
lives---different patterns of electrical use. ACEEE Summer Study on
Energy Efficiency in Buildings 2004. Pacific Grove, California, USA.
Griffith DA. (2003). Spatial autocorrelation and spatial filtering:
Gaining understanding through theory and scientific visualization.
Berlin: Springer, 247 pp. Haim A, Shanas U, Zubidad AS, Scantelbry M.
(2005). Seasonality and seasons out of time---the thermoregulatory
effects of light interference. Chronobiol. Int. 22:57--64. Han X, Naeher
LP. (2006). A review of traffic-related air pollution exposure
assessment studies in the developing world. Environ. Int. 32:106-- 120.
Haus E. (2007). Circadian disruption in shiftwork is probably
carcinogenic to humans. Chronobiol. Int. 24:1255--1256. Hulshof KF,
Lowik MR, Kok FJ, Wedel M, Brants HA, Hermus RJ, ten Hoor F. (1991).
Diet and other life-style factors in high and low socio-economic groups
(Dutch Nutrition Surveillance System). Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 45:441--450.
Hulshof KF, Brussaard JH, Kruizinga AG, Telman J, Lowik MR. (2003).
Socio-economic status, dietary intake and 10 year trends: The Dutch
National Food Consumption Survey. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 57: 128--137.
Jumbe BLC. (2004). Cointegration and causality between electricity
consumption and GDP: Empirical evidence from Malawi. Energy Economics
26:61--68. Kakizaki M, Inoue K, Kuriyama S, Sone T, Matsuda-Ohmori K,
Nakaya N, Fukudo S, Tsuji I. (2008). Sleep duration and the risk of
prostate cancer: The Ohsaki Cohort Study. Br. J. Cancer 99: 176--178.
Kinnear PR, Gray CD. (2007). SPSS 15 made simple. Psychology Press.
Kloog I, Haim A, Stevens RG, Barchana M, Portnov BA. (2008). Light at
night co-distributes with incident breast but not lung cancer in the
female population of Israel. Chronobiol. Int. 25:65--81. Krieger N, Chen
JT, Waterman PD, Soobader MJ, Subramanian SV, Carson R. (2002).
Geocoding and monitoring of U.S. socioeconomic inequalities in mortality
and cancer incidence: Does the choice of area-based measure and
geographic level matter? The Public Health Disparities Geocoding
Project. Am. J. Epidemiol. 156:471-- 482. Kubo T, Ozasa K, Mikami K,
Wakai K, Fujino Y, Watanabe Y, Miki T, Nakao M, Hayashi K, Suzuki K,
Mori M, Washio M, Sakauchi F, Ito Y, Yoshimura T, Tamakoshi A. (2006).
Prospective cohort study of the risk of prostate cancer among
rotating-shift workers: Findings from the Japan collaborative cohort
study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 164:549--555. Madison T, Schottenfeld D, James
SA, Schwartz AG, Gruber SB. (2004). Endometrial cancer: Socioeconomic
status and racial/ethnic differences in stage at diagnosis, treatment,
and survival. Am. J. Public Health 94:2104--2111. Maheswaran R, Strachan
DP, Dodgeon B, Best NG. (2002). A population-based case-control study
for examining early life influences on geographical variation in adult
mortality in England and Wales using stomach cancer and stroke as
examples. Int. J. Epidemiol. 31:375--382. Minami M. (2000). Using
ArcMap: GIS. Redlands, Calif.: ESRI, 528 pp. Morgenstern H, Thomas D.
(1993). Principles of study design in environmental epidemiology.
Environ. Health Perspect. 101(Suppl.4):23--38. Nelson RJ. (2004).
Seasonal immune function and sickness responses. Trends Immunol.
25:187-- 192. O'Leary ES, Vena JE, Freudenheim JL, Brasure J. (2004).
Pesticide exposure and risk of breast cancer: A nested case-control
study of residentially stable women living on Long Island. Environ. Res.
94:134--144. Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. (2001a). Estimating
the world cancer burden: Globocan 2000. Int. J. Cancer 94:153-- 156.
Parkin DM, Bray FI, Devesa SS. (2001b). Cancer burden in the year 2000.
The global picture. Eur. J. Cancer 37(Suppl.8):S4--S66. Parkin DM,
Wabinga H, Nambooze S. (2001c). Completeness in an African cancer
registry. Cancer Causes Control 12:147--152. Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay
J, Pisani P. (2005). Global cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J. Clin.
55: 74--108. Pekkanen J, Pearce N. (2001). Environmental epidemiology:
Challenges and opportunities. Environ. Health Perspect. 109:1--5.
Portaluppi F, Touitou Y, Smolensky MH. (2008). Ethical and
methodological standards for laboratory and medical biological rhythm
research. Chronobiol. Int. 25:999--1016.

Co-Distribution of LAN and Cancers in Men

125

Portnov BA, Dubnov J, Barchana M. (2007). On ecological fallacy,
assessment errors stemming from misguided variable selection, and the
effect of aggregation on the outcome of epidemiological study. J. Expo.
Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 17:106--121. Rezaeian M, Dunn G, St. Leger S,
Appleby L. (2006). Ecological association between suicide rates and
indices of deprivation in the northwest region of England: The
importance of the size of the administrative unit. J. Epidemiol.
Community Health 60:956-- 961. Robinson WS. (1958). Ecological
correlations and the behavior of individuals. Am. Sociol. Rev.
15:351--357. Roosli M, Lortscher M, Egger M, Pfluger D, Schreier N,
Lortscher E, Locher P, Spoerri A, Minder C. (2007). Leukaemia, brain
tumours and exposure to extremely low frequency magnetic fields: Cohort
study of Swiss railway employees. Occup. Environ. Med. 64:553--559.
Schernhammer ES, Laden F, Speizer FE, Willett WC, Hunter DJ, Kawachi I,
Fuchs CS, Colditz GA. (2003). Night-shift work and risk of colorectal
cancer in the nurses' health study. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 95:825--828.
Scott D, Curtis B, Twumasi FO. (2002). Towards the creation of a health
information system for cancer in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Health
Place 8:237--249. Selvin HC. (1958). Durkheim's “suicide” and problems
of empirical research. Am. J. Sociol. 63:607--619. Stevens RG. (2005).
Circadian disruption and breast cancer: From melatonin to clock genes.
Epidemiology 16:254--258. Stevens RG, Rea MS. (2001). Light in the built
environment: Potential role of circadian disruption in endocrine
disruption and breast cancer. Cancer Causes Control 12:279--287. Stevens
RG, Blask DE, Brainard GC, Hansen J, Lockley SW, Provencio I, Rea MS,
Reinlib L. (2007). Meeting report: The role of environmental lighting
and circadian disruption in cancer and other diseases. Environ. Health
Perspect. 115:1357--1362. Verkasalo PK, Pukkala E, Stevens RG, Ojamo M,
Rudanko SL. (1999). Inverse association between breast cancer incidence
and degree of visual impairment in Finland. Br. J. Cancer 80:1459--1460.
Volzke H, Neuhauser H, Moebus S, Baumert J, Berger K, Stang A, Ellert U,
Werner A, Doring A. (2006). Urban-rural disparities in smoking behaviour
in Germany. BMC Public Health 6:146--153. Wells BL, Horm JW. (1992).
Stage at diagnosis in breast cancer: Race and socioeconomic factors. Am.
J. Public Health 82:1383--1385.


