Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 13: 1--7

DOI: 10.1111/jth.12873

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Effects of airborne fine particles (PM2.5) on deep vein thrombosis
admissions in the northeastern United States I . K L O O G , * A . Z A N
O B E T T I , † F . N O R D I O , † B . A . C O U L L , ‡ A . A . B A C
C A R E L L I † and J . S C H W A R T Z † *Department of Geography and
Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer
Sheva, Israel; †Department of Environmental Health--Exposure,
Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard School of Public Health; and
‡Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA

To cite this article: Kloog I, Zanobetti A, Nordio F, Coull BA,
Baccarelli AA, Schwartz J. Effects of airborne fine particles (PM2.5) on
deep vein thrombosis admissions in northeastern United States. J Thromb
Haemost 2015; DOI: 10.1111/jth.12873.

Summary. Background: Literature relating air pollution exposure to deep
vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE), despite biological
plausibility, is sparse. No comprehensive study examining associations
between both short- and long-term exposure to particulate matter (PM)2.5
and DVT or PE has been published. Using a novel PM2.5 prediction model,
we study whether longand short-term PM2.5 exposure is associated with
DVT and PE admissions among elderly across the northeastern United
States. Methods: We estimated daily exposure of PM2.5 in each ZIP code.
We investigated the long- and short-term effects of PM2.5 on DVT and PE
hospital admissions. There were 453 413 DVT and 151 829 PE admissions in
the study. For short-term exposure, we performed a case crossover
analysis matching month and year and defined the hazard period as lag 01
(exposure of day of admission and previous day). For the long-term
association, we used a Poisson regression. Results: A 10-- lg m3
increase in short-term exposure was associated with a 0.63% increase in
DVT admissions (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.03% to 1.25%) and a
6.98% (95% CI = 5.65% to 8.33%) increase in long-term exposure
admissions. For PE, the associated risks were 0.38% (95% CI = 0.68% to
1.25%) and 2.67% (95% CI = 5.65% to 8.33%). These results persisted when
analyses were restricted to location-periods meeting the current
Environmental Protection Agency annual standard of 12 lg m3.
Conclusions: Our findings showed that PM2.5 exposure was associated with
DVT and PE hospi-

Correspondence: Itai Kloog, Department of Geography and Environmental
Development, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, PO 653, Beer Sheva,
Israel. Tel.: +972 8 6428394; fax: +972 8 6428392. E-mail:
ikloog@bgu.ac.il Received 15 July 2014 Manuscript handled by: J.-B.
Hansen Final decision: F. R. Rosendaal, 8 January 2015 © 2015
International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis

tal admissions and that current standards are not protective of this
result. Keywords: air pollution; deep vein thrombosis; environment;
epidemiology; public health; venous thrombosis.

Introduction A strong body of evidence published in recent years has
consistently shown that fine particulate matter (PM2.5 particles with an
aerodynamic diameter ≤ 2.5 lm) is associated with increased hospital
admissions throughout the United States and the world [1--6]. Exposure
to PM2.5 can increase hospital admissions for multiple causes [3,7],
including inter alia admissions for all respiratory causes [2,8],
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [4,9,10], cardiovascular disease
[11,12], stroke [5], myocardial infarction [6], and diabetes [3].
Epidemiology research on cardiovascular effects of PM exposure has
mostly focused on the effects of both shortand long-term PM exposure on
arterial disease, such as triggering of myocardial infarction or stroke
or the development of atherosclerosis and related ischemic disease in
the heart and the brain [13]. A large body of evidence related to this
research has linked short- and long-term PM exposure with changes in a
variety of subclinical physiological end points that are part of the
etiology of venous thromboembolism (VTE), including enhanced systemic
inflammation and increased blood coagulation [14,15]. Yet, the
literature relating air pollution exposure to DVT is sparse. DVT is a
manifestation of VTE. Although most DVT is occult and resolves
spontaneously without complication, death from DVT-associated massive
pulmonary embolism (PE) causes as many as 300 000 deaths annually in the
United States [16]. To the best of our knowledge, no comprehensive study
looking at associations between exposure to both short-term (acute) and
long-term (chronic) exposure to PM2.5 and DVT or PE has been published
to date.

2 I. Kloog et al

Two key studies conducted in recent years by Baccarelli and colleagues
have related long-term exposure to air pollution with increased risk of
DVT [17,18]. In the first study [17], they examined the association of
exposure to PM10 with DVT risk. They found that every 10--mg m3
increase in inhalable PM was associated with a 70% (95% confidence
interval [CI] = 30--123%) increased risk of DVT. A second study by the
same group [18] was based on an expansion of the previous analysis. The
study found that DVT risk was significantly greater for those living
closer to major traffic roads. In a more recent study, Dales et al. [19]
looked at air pollution and hospitalization for VTE in Chile. They used
a time-series approach to test the association between daily air
pollution and VTE hospitalizations in Santiago. They found a 1.05
increased relative risk (95% CI = 1.03--1.06) for a 20.02--lg m3
increase in PM2.5. There have been two studies that looked at the
association between DVT and air pollution and did not find an
association. Kan et al. [20] examined the association between long-term
traffic exposure and incident VTE in a population-based prospective
cohort study (ARIC Study). Shia et al. [21] looked at ambient
particulate matter air pollution and VTE in the women's health
initiative hormone therapy trials. They found no evidence of an
association between short-term or long-term PM exposure and VTE, or
clinically important modification by randomized exposure to exogenous
estrogens among postmenopausal women. We recently presented a new method
of assessing spatiotemporal resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological
studies [22,23] and applied it in various epidemiology studies
[3,24,25]. As opposed to many commonly used exposure models, our model
makes use of satellite aerosol optical depth (AOD) measurements, which
allowed us to estimate spatially resolved PM2.5 on a daily basis across
the northeastern United States. In addition, previous studies of DVT
were limited to populations living close to monitoring stations and thus
did not include individuals living in suburban and rural areas where no
monitoring stations were available. In contrast, our model allows the
use of the entire population in the study area, resulting in more
generalizable results. In this work, we use our PM2.5 prediction model
to study whether long- and short-term PM2.5 exposure is associated with
DVT admissions among elderly persons (aged 65 and older) across the
entire population in the northeastern United States. We also look at PE
as a secondary analysis. Methods Study domain

For this study, we considered a spatial domain that included the entire
northeast region of the United States

comprising Washington, DC, Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont, Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Virginia, New York, and West Virginia (Fig. 1). The data
cover an area of 681 945 km² for a population of 71 748 181 [26].
Exposure data

PM2.5 exposures for 2000--2008 were assessed by using our spatiotemporal
resolved prediction models [22,23] that incorporate satellite AOD data.
The exposure dataset encompasses daily PM2.5 predictions at a 10 9 10-km
spatial resolution across the study area (Fig. 1) during the entire
study period. This spatiotemporal model incorporates classic land use
regression (elevation, distance to major roads, percent of open space,
point emissions, and area emissions), meteorological variables
(temperature, wind speed, relative humidity, and visibility), and
satellite-based AOD data. The model is run in stages where in stage 1,
we calibrate the 10 9 10-km AOD grid-level observations to the PM2.5
monitoring data collected within 10 km of each AOD reading. The model
consists of a mixed model for observed PM2.5 monitoring data that
contains both fixed and day-specific random effects for the intercept
and the AOD and temperature slopes. In the following stage of the model,
we estimate PM2.5 concentrations in grid cells without monitors but with
available AOD measurements by using the stage 1 fit. Finally, in stage 3
of the model, we estimated daily PM2.5 concentration levels for all grid
cells in the study domain for days when AOD data were unavailable. The
model is fit with a smooth function of latitude and longitude and a
random intercept for each cell (similar to universal kriging) that takes
advantage of associations between grid cell AOD values and PM2.5 data
from monitors located elsewhere and associations with available AOD
values in neighboring grid cells. The model performance was excellent
with a mean 10-fold cross-validation “out-of-sample” R2 = 0.82. These
PM2.5 daily predictions were matched to ZIP codes by using ArcGIS (ESRI,
Redlands, CA, USA) and SAS (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) based on
spatial location and date. For more detailed information on the
prediction model, please refer to Kloog et al. [22,23]. DVT hospital
admission data

Individual DVT and PE hospital admittance records were obtained from
Medicare. Medicare is a national social insurance program, administered
by the US federal government since 1966, that guarantees access to
health insurance for Americans aged 65 and older. The dataset includes
DVT and PE hospitalization for all residents of age 65 and older, for
all available years (2000--2008). We defined cases as those with a DVT
and PE admission and © 2015 International Society on Thrombosis and
Haemostasis

Fine particles (PM2.5) and DVT admissions in northeastern United States
3

Legend DVT Admission cases

Pm2.5

N 30

120

240 Km

6.49 -- 7.65 7.66 -- 8.25 8.26 -- 8.58 8.59 -- 8.92 8.93 -- 9.28 9.29 --
9.65 9.66 -- 10.00 10.01 -- 10.35 10.36 -- 10.73 10.74 -- 11.11 11.12 --
11.48 11.49 -- 11.83 11.84 -- 12.18 12.19 -- 12.56 12.57 -- 12.93 12.94
-- 13.38 13.39 -- 13.99 14.00 -- 14.91 14.92 -- 16.75 16.76 -- 20.82

Boston

New York Pittsburgh

Philadelphia Washington

Fig. 1. Map of the study area showing the residential location of
admission cases juxtaposed over a sample PM2.5 10 9 10 km pollution grid
for January 8, 2001.

a primary discharge diagnosis using the International Classification of
Diseases, Ninth Revision for DVT- and PE-related admissions. These
records included information such as age, sex, date of admission,
race/ethnicity, and ZIP code of residence. The US Medicare data are
previously collected administrative data and do not require individual
patient consent. Covariates

Temperature data were obtained through the National Climatic Data Center
(NCDC) [27]. Only continuous operating stations with daily data running
from 2000 to 2008 were used. For meteorological variables, ZIP codes
were matched to the closest weather station. All socioeconomic variables
were obtained through the US Census Bureau from the 2000 social,
economic, and housing characteristics datasets [28]. Socioeconomic
variables used included the following ZIP code--level information:
percentage of minorities (defined as non-white), age, © 2015
International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis

education (people with no high school education), and median income.
Statistical methods

ZIP code--specific DVT admissions were matched with our exposure
estimates for each 10 9 10-km grid cell. We used a case-crossover
analysis approach for the acute effects. We used a Poisson proportionate
hazard survival analysis based on the approach of Laird and Oliver [29],
with a baseline hazard that varies for each follow-up interval to
estimate the long-term effects. The resulting model specifies that each
follow-up interval has a separate intercept and an offset representing
person-time at risk. Because the entire available Medicare population is
being analyzed and DVT admission cases are rare events, the person-time
at risk varies slowly and smoothly across time. In the limit as the time
interval gets small, the timeperiod specific intercept also approaches a
smooth function of time, and hence both can be replaced with the

4 I. Kloog et al

smooth function of time, k(t). k(t) will be estimated with a natural
cubic spline with 5degrees of freedom per year. Specifically: logðkit Þ
¼ ki þ kðtÞ þ temporal covariates where ki ¼ d þ c1 PM2:5i þ spatial
covariates + zipcode þ ei Where ki is the long-term admission rate in
grid cell i, k(t) is a smooth function of time, temporal covariates are
temperature and day of the week, PM2.5i, is the long-term yearly moving
average PM2.5 concentrations in cell i, spatial covariates are the
socioeconomic factors defined at the ZIP code level (percentage
minority, median income, percentage with less than high school
education), and ei is the remaining unexplained difference in admission
rate between cell i and other cells, which is treated as a mean zero
normal random effect with variance estimated from the data. This
approach has previously been used to estimate long-term air pollution
effects [3]. The case-crossover design was developed as a variant of the
case-control design to study the effects of transient exposures on acute
events [30]. This design samples only cases and compares each subject's
exposure experience in a time period just before a case-defining event
with that subject's exposure at other times. Because there is perfect
matching on all measured or unmeasured subject characteristics that do
not vary over time, there can be no confounding by those
characteristics. If, in addition, the control days are chosen to be
close to the event day, slowly varying subject characteristics are also
controlled by matching. Bateson and Schwartz [31,32] demonstrated that
by choosing control days close to event days, even very strong
confounding by seasonal patterns could be controlled by using this
design. Levy et al. [33] showed that a time-stratified approach to
choosing controls, such as sampling control days from the same month of
the same year, avoided some subtle selection bias issues and resulted in
a proper conditional logistic likelihood. Schwartz et al. [34]
demonstrated via simulation that this approach gave unbiased effect
estimates and coverage probabilities even in the presence of strong
seasonal confounders. We used this time-stratified approach in our
analysis and defined the base hazard period as the same day and the day
before the hospital admission: The case window was defined as the “at
risk” period preceding the event (i.e., PM2.5 exposure at the same day
and the day before the hospital admission). The control windows are
periods of the same length as, and not overlapping with, the case window
that provides an estimate of the expected frequency of exposure for each
case (i.e., 2-day average PM2.5 exposure every third day in the same
month not overlapping with the case window). The case window and the
control windows derive from the same person at different times; that is,
the case-crossover design is based on

subject-matched sampling. It should be noted that concordant pairs in
the case crossover analysis are dropped out. The data were analyzed
using conditional logistic regression (PROC PHREG, release 8.2; SAS
Institute). Temperature with the same moving average as PM2.5 was
included in the model as a potential confounder. To investigate the
robustness of our results, various sensitivity analyses were run.
Specifically, we analyzed other averaging periods: we examined PM2.5
exposure 3 days prior to admission: lag02 (a moving average of day of
admittance exposure and 2 days of previous exposure) and PM2.5 exposure
on day of admission-lag0 (day of admittance exposure) vs. lag01 (a
moving average of day of admittance exposure and previous day exposure).
We also looked at the differences between the sexes. Finally, we also
looked at the long-term association when we restricted the analysis to
periods below the EPA current annual standard of 12 lg m3 to determine
whether associations persist at low concentrations. Results Table 1
gives the characteristics of the admitted people included in our
analyses, which included 453 413 DVT admissions (and 151 829 PE
admissions). Of these DVT admissions, the majority were males (62.69%)
and white (85.27%), with an average age of 79 years. Table 2 contains a
summary of the predicted exposures for both the short-term PM exposure
(lag 1―which denotes a 2-day moving average from day of admission) and
long-term exposure (1-year moving average from day of admission), as
well as temperature across all grid cells in the analysis. Table 3
presents the estimated percentage increase for DVT and PE, and
associated 95% CIs, in hospital admissions for a 10--lg m3 increase in
PM2.5 for both the short- and long-term exposures. Our results indicated
that short-term exposure was associated with a 0.63% increase in DVT
admissions (95% CI = 0.03--1.25%), while longterm exposure was
associated with a 6.98% increase in DVT admissions (95% CI =
5.65--8.33%). In addition, we

Table 1 Descriptive statistics for deep vein thrombosis hospital
admissions (mean [SD] age, 79.04 [7.84] years) across the northeastern
United States for 2000--2008

Variable Sex Male Female Race White Black Other

No. (%)

Short-term PM2.5 exposure, mean (SD)

Long-term PM2.5 exposure, mean (SD)

170 067 (37.51) 283 346 (62.49)

12.48 (6.74) 12.69 (6.84)

12.69 (2.20) 12.86 (2.19)

386 606 (85.27) 54 842 (12.10) 11 965 (2.64)

12.44 (6.72) 13.67 (7.16) 13.31 (7.19)

12.63 (2.17) 13.86 (1.95) 13.55 (2.29)

© 2015 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis

Fine particles (PM2.5) and DVT admissions in northeastern United States
5 Table 2 Descriptive statistics for short-term PM Covariate 3

Acute (2-day moving average) PM2.5 (lg m ) Chronic (1-y exposure) PM2.5
(lg m3) Temperature (F°)

2.5

exposure and temperature across the northeastern United States for
2000--2009

Mean

Min

Max

Median

SD

Range

IQR

Q1

Q3

Days of data available

12.6 12.8 48.0

0.0 0.0 12.2

96.0 29.0 60.6

11.1 12.9 50.5

6.8 2.2 5.5

100.7 24.5 48.4

8.3 3.0 9.8

7.7 11.3 42.2

15.9 14.3 52.1

453 413 453 413 453 413

Q1 and Q3 are quartiles.

Table 3 Estimated percentage increase in DVT hospital admissions for a
10--lg m3 increase in short- and long-term PM2.5 Type Short term (lag1)
Long term Sensitivity analysis Short term (lag0) Short term (lag2)

DVT % increase

PE % increase

0.64 (0.03 to 1.25) 6.98 (5.65 to 8.33)

0.38 (0.68 to 1.44) 2.67 (1.66 to 3.75)

0.59 (0.07--1.11) 0.68 (0.02 to 1.38)

0.68 (0.02 to 1.38) 0.59 (0.07 to 1.11)

DVT, deep vein thrombosis; PE, pulmonary embolism.

found that short-term exposure was associated with a 0.38% increase
(albeit not significant) in PE admissions (95% CI = 0.68% to 1.25%),
while long-term exposure was associated with a 2.67% increase in PE
admissions (95% CI = 5.65--8.33%). The results from the sensitivity
analysis are presented in Table 3 as well. In general, the results of
the sensitivity analysis were consistent with the primary analysis,
albeit the 2-day lag results were non-significant (marginally): lag0
exposure was associated with a 0.59% increase in DVT admissions (95% CI
= 0.07--1.1%), while lag2 exposure was associated with a 0.68% increase
in DVT admissions (95% CI = 0.02% to 1.38%). Lag0 exposure was
associated with a 0.68% increase in PE admissions (95% CI = 0.02% to
1.38%), while lag2 exposure was associated with a 0.59% increase in PE
admissions (95% CI = 0.07--1.11%). We found differences (albeit not
significant based on the P value of the interaction term) in the PM2.5
associations with DVT between the sexes. Males showed a 0.83% increase
in DVT admissions (95% CI = 0.50-- 1.17%), while females showed a 0.73%
increase in DVT admissions (95% CI = 0.42--1.04%). The low exposure
analysis found that long-term exposure was still significantly
associated with a 4.27% increase in DVT admissions (95% CI =
2.32--6.25%) and a 1.91% increase in PE admissions (95% CI =
0.06--3.80%) when restricted to observations below the Environmental
Protection Agency national ambient air quality standard of 12 lg m3.
Discussion We examine associations between PM2.5 exposure estimates
generated by a new spatiotemporal resolved prediction model and
increased DVT and PE hospital © 2015 International Society on Thrombosis
and Haemostasis

admissions in an elderly population (aged 65 and older) across the
northeastern United States. We found that the associations with DVT for
both short- and long-term exposures were significantly positive. In
addition, we found positive associations with PE, albeit only the
longterm association was statistically significant. Notably, this study
includes more events than previous studies of DVT and incorporates the
entire 65 years and older population in the study area, not just the
more urban population located near monitors such as was used in the two
reports by Baccarelli and colleagues [17,18], in which because some area
residents had no local monitoring stations around them and thus were
removed from the analysis. In addition, the association with long-term
exposure persists at exposure levels below the Environmental Protection
Agency annual standard of 12 lg m3. Although DVT symptoms often go
unnoticed for days (the lag between symptom initiation and diagnosis can
last as long as 30 days [17]), we still saw associations with short-term
exposure. One explanation is that air pollution peaks might worsen the
symptoms, such as by increasing the size of an already existing clot
that can lead to hospitalization. It should be noted that there is a
possibility that these findings could be mediated through these other
disease states. We plan to look into such meditations in future studies.
Recent studies have associated exposure to air pollution with activation
of inflammatory pathways, production of reactive oxygen species,
endothelial injury and dysfunction, arterial vasoconstriction, and
alterations in blood coagulation factors [35--37]. Venous
thromboembolism is the third most common cardiovascular disease, after
acute coronary syndromes and stroke [38]. Determinants of arterial
thromboembolism and VTE have been considered as distinctly different
conditions. Recent studies showed that there are pathophysiological
links between arterial thromboembolism and VTE and that they share
common risk factors such as age, obesity, diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, hyperlipemia, and potential exposure to air pollution
[39]. The current evidence, albeit limited, suggests that exposure to
air pollution can contribute to pulmonary and systemic inflammation and
blood coagulation; therefore, an epidemiological link between air
pollution and both arterial thromboembolism and VTE is plausible [40].
There are a few limitations in the present study. The spatial
resolutions for the Medicare data (ZIP codes) are

6 I. Kloog et al

not individual addresses, but those are not available because of privacy
concerns. In addition, long-term PM2.5 exposure may be associated with
other confounders that can potentially increase DVT risk. Although the
analysis was adjusted for available risk factors for DVT, we cannot
exclude that other unmeasured confounders might have influenced our
results. These confounders (e.g., smoking, lifestyle, physical
activities conducted, or other exposures that are difficult to measure)
were unavailable during this study and thus were not used. This
confounding is not an issue in the case crossover design, which
eliminates confounding by stable individual characteristics. Selection
bias is always a concern in such studies. In the United States, all
people older than 65 are entitled to free Medicare insurance, so we
expect the population studied to be representative of the overall
population (older than 65 years). Another limitation of this study is
that we do not have information on other risk factors such as body mass
index, medication use, or existing comorbidities. This may potentially
lead to some potential residual confounding if they are also associated
with pollution. In addition, the association of PM2.5 with DVT could be
a downstream consequence of its association with cancer. Finally,
misclassification of the outcome can be expected as a result of
diagnostic or coding errors. However, these errors are likely unrelated
to PM levels and are expected to reduce the precision of our estimates
and potentially bias the relative risk toward the null. The use of 10 9
10 km for the satellite data could also be improved as higher-resolution
satellite data become available. As satellite remote sensing evolves and
progresses, higher spatial resolution data (such as 1 9 1 km) are
expected to be released and will further reduce exposure error [41].
Such finer resolution should enable us to assess more precise estimated
daily individual exposure as they relate to different locations such as
residence, workplace, and so on, for datasets where individual addresses
are available. Our findings showed that PM2.5 exposure was associated
with DVT hospital admissions. In addition, we demonstrate that our
AOD-based exposure models can be successfully applied to epidemiological
studies. Addendum I. Kloog designed and performed research, collected
data, and contributed to discussion and wrote the manuscript. A.
Zanobetti performed research and collected, analyzed, and interpreted
the data. F. Nordio collected data and helped design the research. B. A.
Coull contributed to discussion and statistical analysis and edited the
manuscript. A. A. Baccarelli designed research, interpreted data,
contributed to discussion, and edited the manuscript. J. Schwartz
designed research, interpreted data, contributed to discussion, and
co-wrote the manuscript.

Acknowledgements This work was supported by Harvard Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) Center Grant USEPA grant RD83479801 and NIEHS
ES-000002. Disclosure of Conflict of Interest The authors state that
they have no conflict of interest. References 1 Brunekreef B, Holgate
ST. Air pollution and health. Lancet 2002; 360: 1233--42. 2 Fusco D,
Forastiere F, Michelozzi P, Spadea T, Ostro B, Arca M, Perucci C. Air
pollution and hospital admissions for respiratory conditions in Rome,
Italy. Eur Respir J 2001; 17: 1143. 3 Kloog I, Coull BA, Zanobetti A,
Koutrakis P, Schwartz JD. Acute and chronic effects of particles on
hospital admissions in new-england. PLoS One 2012; 7: e34664. 4 Peacock
JL, Anderson HR, Bremner SA, Marston L, Seemungal TA, Strachan DP,
Wedzicha JA. Outdoor air pollution and respiratory health in patients
with COPD. Thorax 2011; 66: 591--6. 5 Wellenius GA, Schwartz J,
Mittleman MA. Air pollution and hospital admissions for ischemic and
hemorrhagic stroke among Medicare beneficiaries. Stroke 2005; 36: 2549.
6 Zanobetti A, Schwartz J. The effect of particulate air pollution on
emergency admissions for myocardial infarction: a multicity
case-crossover analysis. Environ Health Perspect 2005; 113: 978-- 82. 7
Zanobetti A, Franklin M, Koutrakis P, Schwartz J. Fine particulate air
pollution and its components in association with causespecific emergency
admissions. Environ Health 2009; 8: 58. 8 Schwartz J. Air pollution and
hospital admissions for respiratory disease. Epidemiology 1996; 7:
20--8. 9 Halonen JI, Lanki T, Yli-Tuomi T, Tiittanen P, Kulmala M,
Pekkanen J. Particulate air pollution and acute cardiorespiratory
hospital admissions and mortality among the elderly. Epidemiology 2009;
20: 143--53. 10 Halonen JI, Lanki T, Yli-Tuomi T, Kulmala M, Tiittanen
P, Pekkanen J. Urban air pollution, and asthma and COPD hospital
emergency room visits. Thorax 2008; 63: 635--41. 11 Schwartz J. Air
pollution and hospital admissions for cardiovascular disease in Tucson.
Epidemiology 1997; 8: 371--7. 12 Dominici F, Peng RD, Bell ML, Pham L,
McDermott A, Zeger SL, Samet JM. Fine particulate air pollution and
hospital admission for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. JAMA
2006; 295: 1127--34. 13 Brook RD. Air pollution: what is bad for the
arteries might be bad for the veins. Arch Intern Med 2008; 168: 909--11.
14 Brook RD, Franklin B, Cascio W, Hong Y, Howard G, Lipsett M, Luepker
R, Mittleman M, Samet J, Smith SC. Air pollution and cardiovascular
disease. Circulation 2004; 109: 2655--71. 15 Brook RD, Rajagopalan S,
Pope CA, Brook JR, Bhatnagar A, Diez-Roux AV, Holguin F, Hong Y, Luepker
RV, Mittleman MA. Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular
disease an update to the scientific statement from the American heart
association. Circulation 2010; 121: 2331--78. 16 Tapson VF. Acute
pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 1037--52. 17 Baccarelli A,
Martinelli I, Zanobetti A, Grillo P, Hou L-F, Bertazzi PA, Mannucci PM,
Schwartz J. Exposure to particulate air pollution and risk of deep vein
thrombosis. Arch Intern Med 2008; 168: 920. © 2015 International Society
on Thrombosis and Haemostasis

Fine particles (PM2.5) and DVT admissions in northeastern United States
7 18 Baccarelli A, Martinelli I, Pegoraro V, Melly S, Grillo P,
Zanobetti A, Hou L, Bertazzi PA, Mannucci PM, Schwartz J. Living near
major traffic roads and risk of deep vein thrombosis. Circulation 2009;
119: 3118--24. 19 Dales RE, Cakmak S, Vidal CB. Air pollution and
hospitalization for venous thromboembolic disease in Chile. J Thromb
Haemost 2010; 8: 669--74. 20 Kan H, Jia J, Chen B. The association of
daily diabetes mortality and outdoor air pollution in Shanghai China. J
Environ Health 2004; 67: 21--6. 21 Shih RA, Griffin BA, Salkowski N,
Jewell A, Eibner C, Bird CE, Liao D, Cushman M, Margolis HG, Eaton CB,
Whitsel EA. Ambient particulate matter air pollution and venous
thromboembolism in the women's health initiative hormone therapy trials.
Environ Health Perspect 2011; 119: 326--31. 22 Kloog I, Koutrakis P,
Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J. Assessing temporally and spatially
resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological studies using satellite
aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos Environ 2011; 45: 6267--75. 23
Kloog I, Nordio F, Coull BA, Schwartz J. Incorporating local land use
regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model of
spatio-temporal pm2.5 exposures in the mid-atlantic states. Environ Sci
Technol 2012; 46: 11913--21. 24 Kloog I, Melly SJ, Ridgway WL, Coull BA,
Schwartz J. Using new satellite based exposure methods to study the
association between pregnancy pm2.5 exposure, premature birth and birth
weight in Massachusetts. Environ Health 2012; 11: 40. 25 Kloog I,
Ridgway B, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Schwartz JD. Long- and short-term
exposure to pm2.5 and mortality. Epidemiology 2013; 24: 555--61. 26
USCB. United States Census Bureau of 2010 [Internet]. US Census Bureau;
2010. http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/ index.html. Accessed 1
December 2013. 27 NCDC. The national climatic data center data
inventories [Internet]. 2010.
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/climateinventories.html. Accessed 1
May 2012. 28 USCB. United States Census Bureau of 2000 [Internet]. US
Census Bureau; 2000. Available from: http://www.census.gov/geo/
www/tiger/index.html. Accessed 1 November 2013.

© 2015 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis

29 Laird N, Olivier D. Covariance analysis of censored survival data
using log-linear analysis techniques. J Am Stat Assoc 1981; 76: 231--40.
30 Maclure M. The case-crossover design: a method for studying transient
effects on the risk of acute events. Am J Epidemiol 1991; 133: 144--53.
31 Bateson TF, Schwartz J. Control for seasonal variation and time trend
in case-crossover studies of acute effects of environmental exposures.
Epidemiology 1999; 10: 539--44. 32 Bateson TF, Schwartz J. Selection
bias and confounding in casecrossover analyses of environmental
time-series data. Epidemiology 2001; 12: 654--61. 33 Levy D, Lumley T,
Sheppard L, Kaufman J, Checkoway H. Referent selection in case-crossover
analyses of acute health effects of air pollution. Epidemiology 2001;
12: 186--92. 34 Schwartz J, Zanobetti A, Bateson T. Morbidity and
mortality among elderly residents in cities with daily PM measurements.
Revis Anal Time-Ser Stud Air Pollut Health 2003; 25--58. 35 Donaldson K,
Stone V, Seaton A, MacNee W. Ambient particle inhalation and the
cardiovascular system: potential mechanisms. Environ Health Perspect
2001; 109: 523. 36 Peters A, Frohlich M, Doring A, Immervoll T, Wichmann
HE, Hutchinson WL, Pepys MB, Koenig W. Particulate air pollution is
associated with an acute phase response in men; results from the
MONICA-Augsburg Study. Eur Heart J 2001; 22: 1198--204. 37 Vermylen J,
Nemmar A, Nemery B, Hoylaerts MF. Ambient air pollution and acute
myocardial infarction. J Thromb Haemost 2005; 3: 1955--61. 38 Giuntini
C, Di Ricco G, Marini C, Melillo E, Palla A. Epidemiology. CHEST J 1995;
107: 3S--9S. 39 Prandoni P, Bilora F, Marchiori A, Bernardi E,
Petrobelli F, Lensing AW, Prins MH, Girolami A. An association between
atherosclerosis and venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 1435--41.
40 Pope CA. The expanding role of air pollution in cardiovascular
disease does air pollution contribute to risk of deep vein thrombosis?
Circulation 2009; 119: 3050--2. 41 Chudnovsky AA, Kostinski A, Lyapustin
A, Koutrakis P. Spatial scales of pollution from variable resolution
satellite imaging. Environ Pollut 2013; 172: 131--8.


