Acute and Chronic Effects of Particles on Hospital Admissions in
New-England Itai Kloog1*, Brent A. Coull2, Antonella Zanobetti1, Petros
Koutrakis1, Joel D. Schwartz1 1 Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program,
Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America, 2 Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America

Abstract Background: Many studies have reported significant associations
between exposure to PM2.5 and hospital admissions, but all have focused
on the effects of short-term exposure. In addition all these studies
have relied on a limited number of PM2.5 monitors in their study
regions, which introduces exposure error, and excludes rural and
suburban populations from locations in which monitors are not available,
reducing generalizability and potentially creating selection bias.
Methods: Using our novel prediction models for exposure combining land
use regression with physical measurements (satellite aerosol optical
depth) we investigated both the long and short term effects of PM2.5
exposures on hospital admissions across New-England for all residents
aged 65 and older. We performed separate Poisson regression analysis for
each admission type: all respiratory, cardiovascular disease (CVD),
stroke and diabetes. Daily admission counts in each zip code were
regressed against long and short-term PM2.5 exposure, temperature,
socio-economic data and a spline of time to control for seasonal trends
in baseline risk. Results: We observed associations between both
short-term and long-term exposure to PM2.5 and hospitalization for all
of the outcomes examined. In example, for respiratory diseases, for
every10-mg/m3 increase in short-term PM2.5 exposure there is a 0.70
percent increase in admissions (CI = 0.35 to 0.52) while concurrently
for every10-mg/m3 increase in long-term PM2.5 exposure there is a 4.22
percent increase in admissions (CI = 1.06 to 4.75). Conclusions: As with
mortality studies, chronic exposure to particles is associated with
substantially larger increases in hospital admissions than acute
exposure and both can be detected simultaneously using our exposure
models. Citation: Kloog I, Coull BA, Zanobetti A, Koutrakis P, Schwartz
JD (2012) Acute and Chronic Effects of Particles on Hospital Admissions
in New-England. PLoS ONE 7(4): e34664. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034664
Editor: Mike B. Gravenor, University of Swansea, United Kingdom Received
September 28, 2011; Accepted March 6, 2012; Published April 17, 2012
Copyright: ÃŸ 2012 Kloog et al. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author and source are credited. Funding:
The research was supported by the Harvard Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) Center, Grants R-832416 and RD 83479801, NIH grants ES00002
and ES012044. The funders had no role in study design, data collection
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist. * E-mail: ekloog@hsph.harvard.edu

[23,24,25,26]. For example, Oudin and colleagues [25] investigated
whether the effects of major risk factors for ischemic stroke were
modified by long-term exposure to air pollution in Scania, southern
Sweden. They found that in low level air pollution areas, the risk for
ischemic stroke associated with diabetes seemed to increase with
long-term exposure to air pollution. Hruba and colleuges [24] studied
the effects of long-term exposure to air pollution on respiratory
symptoms and respiratory hospitalization in a cross-sectional study of
children. They showed found a significant increase in hospital
admissions for asthma, bronchitis or pneumonia associated with
increasing air pollution. Andersen and colleagues [26] studied the
association between chronic exposure to traffic-related air pollution
(NO2) and incidence of diabetes. They found that chronic exposure to NO2
may contribute to the development of diabetes, especially in individuals
with a healthy lifestyle, nonsmokers, and physically active individuals.
All previous studies have been limited by the lack of high resolution
daily exposure data. Many early studies had only 1 in 3 day
measurements, and locations without nearby monitors could not be
analyzed at all. In addition all previous studies focused on

Introduction Short-term variations in air pollution have been associated
with hospital admissions for various causes in cities all over the world
[1,2,3,4,5,6]. These associations include admissions for respiratory
disease [7,8,9], ischemic heart disease-IHD [10,11], cardiovascular
disease-CVD [7,12], myocardial infarction-MI [13,14], congestive heart
failure-CHF [15,16], pneumonia [17,18], and diabetes [19,20]. For PM2.5
in particular Dominici and colleagues [21] reported associations with
hospitalizations for multiple diseases, using single day average PM2.5.
Zanobetti and colleagues [22] estimated the association between two-day
mean PM2.5 and emergency hospital admissions for CVD,MI,CHF, respiratory
disease, and diabetes in 26 US communities, and reported larger effect
sizes than those reported in Dominici et al. [21]. There are currently,
to the best of our knowledge, no published studies on the effects of
long-term (chronic) particulate matter (PM) exposure and hospital
admissions. There are however some studies that provide general evidence
for long-term associations of air pollution with hospital admissions,
although not specifically focusing on PM2.5 PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org

1

April 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 4 | e34664

Effects of PM on Hospital Admissions in New-England

kriging) that takes advantage of the association of grid cells AOD
values with PM2.5 monitoring located elsewhere, and the association with
available AOD values in neighboring grid cells. Even for location-day
combinations without AOD data our model performance was still excellent
(mean out-of-sample R2 = 0.81). Importantly, these R2 are for daily
observations, rather than monthly or yearly, values. By averaging our
estimated daily exposures at each location we generated long term
exposures. This enabled us to study both the short term and long term
effects of ambient particles, respectively. PM2.5 exposure data were
generated by our prediction models. The New-England exposure dataset
contains daily PM2.5 concentrations at a 10610 km spatial resolution
across New-England for the whole study period (Figure 1). This data was
matched to zipcodes using ArcGIS and SAS based on spatial location and
date. Hospital Admittance data. Individual hospital admittance records
were obtained from the US Medicare program and covers hospitalization
for all residents aged 65 and older, for all available years
(2000--2006). There were around 3000 hospitals under the study area. We
defined cases as those with an emergency admission and a primary
discharge diagnosis of all respiratory (ICD 9 460--519), CVD (ICD 9
390--429), stroke (ICD 9 430--436) and diabetes (both primary and
secondary admission cause) (ICD 9 250). We choose broader areas of
admissions, since one would expect broader areas of admission to produce
less noisy estimates for two reasons. First, the counts are higher and
therefore there is more power to examine CVD admissions than IHD
admissions. Secondly, studies of misdiagnosis in hospital administrative
records show that the broader the categories, the less misclassification
there is, which would also eliminate noise and produce more stable
results. For diabetes, which is a chronic condition, we looked at the
rate of admission of subjects for any primary cause with diabetes as a
secondary cause, as well as the small number of admissions with diabetes
listed as the primary cause of admission. This allows us to examine
whether long term exposure to particles is associated with higher rates
of hospitalization of diabetics, as well as whether diabetics have
higher rates of acute hospitalizations on high air pollution days. These
records included information such as age, sex, date of admission,
race/ethnicity, and zipcode of residence. From this data, we constructed
daily counts for each admission cause for each zip code. This allows us
to examine the effects of both day-today contrasts within residential
area, as well as long term contrasts across locations. Covariates.
Temperature data were obtained through the National Climatic Data Center
(NCDC) [35]. Only continuous operating stations with daily data running
from 2000--2006 were used. Zipcodes were matched to the closest weather
station for meteorological variables. All Socioeconomic variables were
obtained through the U.S. Census Bureau Census from the 2000 social,
economic and housing characteristics datasets [36]. Socio-economic
variables used included the following zipcode level information: Percent
of minorities, age, education (people with no high school education) and
median income.

short-term PM exposure and not long term (chronic) exposure or both. We
have recently presented a new method of assessing temporally-and
spatially-resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological studies which is
an extension of existing land use models [27,28]. In this paper, we use
our model predictions to study the association between PM2.5 exposure
and hospital admissions among elderly (aged 65 and older from Medicare
data) across New England, and to investigate the effects of both short
term (acute) and long-term (chronic) exposure on these outcomes for the
first time concurrently. In addition our study investigates the entire
population of a region, rather than selected locations near monitoring
sites as commonly done in previous studies.

Methods Study domain The presented study's spatial domain included the
NewEngland region comprising the states of Connecticut, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont, (Figure 1). The
total area of New England is 186,460 km2. The total population in
New-England as of 2010 is 14,444,865. The average size of population in
New-England zip codes for the general population is 8130 and 1105 for
people 65 and over. The median population is 3535 for the general
population and 430 for people 65 and over [29].

Data Exposure data. Land use regression (LUR) models provide good
estimates of spatially resolved long term exposures, but are poor at
capturing short term exposures. Due to its large spatial coverage and
reliable repeated measurements, satellite remote sensing, provides
another important tool for monitoring aerosols, particularly for areas
and exposure scenarios where surface PM2.5 monitors are not available
[30,31,32,33]. Using satellite derived aerosol optical depth (AOD)
measurements allowed us to predict daily PM2.5 concentration levels
across New England for 2000-- 2008 at a 10610 km spatial resolution
[34]. This published model has been slightly updated to include nested
regions in the yearly models and weights to account for non-random
missingness in AOD. In brief, we used day-specific calibrations of AOD
data, using ground PM2.5 measurements from 78 monitoring sites in the
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) and IMPROVE (Interagency
Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments) monitoring network to avoid
prediction error due to changes in planetary boundary layer etc.
previously noted by Paciorek et al. [28]. We also incorporated land use
regression and meteorological variables (temperature, wind Speed,
visibility, elevation, distance to major roads, percent of open space,
point emissions and area emissions). To estimate PM2.5 concentrations in
each grid cell on each day we start by calibrating the AOD-PM2.5
relationship for each day using grid cells with both monitors and AOD
values using mixed models with random slopes for day and nested regions.
To validate our first model, the dataset was repeatedly randomly divided
into 90% and 10% splits. Predictions for the held-out 10% of the data
were made from the model fit of the remaining 90% of the data. This
â€˜â€˜out of sample'' process was repeated ten times and crossvalidated (CV)
R2 values were computed. The first stage calibrations resulted in high
out-of-sample R2 (mean out-of-sample R2 = 0.85). Later, we used a second
model to address days when AOD measures are not available (due to cloud
coverage, snow etc...). We thus fit a model with a smooth function of
latitude and longitude and a random intercept for each cell (similar to
universal PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org

Statistical Methods The admission counts by zip code were matched with
our exposure estimates for each 10610 km grid cell it fell into. While
short-term effects of air pollution are traditionally studied using
Poisson log-linear models and long-term effects are estimated using the
Cox proportional hazard model, we make use of the equivalence between
Poisson regression and the piecewise constant 2

April 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 4 | e34664

Effects of PM on Hospital Admissions in New-England

Figure 1: Map of the study area showing the residential location of
admission cases juxtaposed over a sample PM2.5 10610 km pollution grid
for 01/07/2001. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034664.g001

above and below the median which suggests a linear relationship of these
variables. The basic model takes advantage of the fact that a
hierarchical mixed Poisson regression can capture both acute and chronic
effects. Specifically, we assume that the admission rate lit in the ith
cell on the tth day can be modeled as follows:

proportional hazard model noted by Laird and Oliver [37]. This approach
allows us to model the time to a hospital admission as a function of
both long term and short term exposure simultaneously. Most time series
studies have reported stronger associations with mean PM2.5 taken over
the current and previous day as compared to same day exposure [38];
therefore for the short-term exposure we used the mean of PM2.5 on the
day of admission and day before admission in all models. Long-term
exposure was calculated as the mean exposure in each zip-code across the
whole study period (7 years). Short term exposure was defined as the
difference between the two day average and the long-term average. To
check the linearity of main effects investigated we fit a piecewise
linear model estimating the effect of PM for levels below and above the
median of short and long term PM2.5. We did not find a significantly
different effect between the two slopes

PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org

log (lit )~li zb1 DPMit zl(t)ztemporal covariates where li ~dzcPMi:
zspatial covariateszei where li is the long term admission rate in grid
cell i, DPMit is the deviation of the PM2.5 concentration in cell i from
its long term average on day t, l(t) is a smooth function of time,
temporal 3

April 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 4 | e34664

Effects of PM on Hospital Admissions in New-England

Table 1. Descriptive statistics stratified by long term exposure:
Hospital admissions by type of admission across New-England for the
years 2000--2006.

Characteristic

All Respiratory

CVD

Stroke

Diabetes

No. (%)

No. (%)

No. (%)

No. (%)

Low pollution Sex Male

89241 (44.63)

131234(45.52)

24066(41.71)

77553(43.59)

Female

11073 (55.37)

157039(54.48)

33638(58.29)

100382(56.41)

White

192257 (94.41)

277404(96.23)

55112(95.51)

165174(92.83)

Black

3321 (1.66)

4885(1.69)

1186(2.06)

6339(3.56)

other

4395 (2.20)

5984(2.08)

1406(2.44)

6422(3.61)

Age

79.55

79.24

80.30

77.24

Race

High pollution Sex Male

101629(44.52)

148566(44.55)

27516(40.66)

93918(42.56)

Female

126658 (55.48)

184948(55.45)

40162(59.34)

126743(57.44)

White

213519 (93.53)

312202(93.61)

62741(92.71)

194360(88.08)

Black

7672 (3.36)

11920(3.57)

2920(4.31)

15682(7.11)

other

7096 (3.11)

9392( 2.82)

2017(2.98)

10619(4.81)

Age

79.64

79.31

80.27

77.26

Race

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034664.t001

and percent of people with no high school education. l(t) was estimated
with a natural cubic spline with 35 degrees of freedom (5 df per year).
To investigate the robustness of our results various sensitivity
analysis were run on the all respiratory admission as a sample group. We
analyzed other averaging periods (lag1,lag2 vs lag0) and the addition of
the land use and temporal variables (percent of, percent of house owners
living in owned house, Percent of occupied housing units with more than
one person per room and median home value, absolute humidity). We also
wanted to compare the results from our novel prediction models with an
analysis of this data base using a traditional time series approach. We
ran the analysis for the Boston area (Suffolk, Norfolk and Middlesex
counties) using daily admission counts for all respiratory admissions,
PM2.5 from a central PM monitor (Countway monitor at Harvard school of
public health) and temperature data from Logan airport as commonly done
in time series analysis.

covariates are temperature and day of the week, PMi. is the long term
average PM concentration in cell i, spatial covariates are socioeconomic
factors defined at the zipcode level, and ei is the remaining
unexplained difference in admission rate between cell i and other cells,
which is treated as a mean zero normal random effect with variance
estimated from the data. This model combines the usual Poisson time
series analysis with a Poisson representation of a piecewise-constant
proportional hazards model. The resulting model specifies that each time
interval defining the constant hazards has a separate intercept, and an
offset representing person-time at risk. Since the entire population is
being analyzed, and specific admissions cases by type are rare events,
the persontime at risk varies slowly and smoothly across time. In the
limit as the time interval gets small, the time-period specific
intercept also approaches a smooth function of time, and hence both can
be replaced with the smooth function of time, l(t). The specific
covariates we used were temperature with the same moving average as
PM2.5, age, percent minorities, median income

Table 2. Descriptive statistics for short term PM2.5 exposure, long term
PM2.5 exposure and temperature in New-England for 2000-- 2006.

Min

Max

Median

SD

Range

IQR

Q1

Q3

Days of data available

Lag0 PM2.5 (acute 9.60 PM)

0.01

72.59

8.55

4.90

72.59

5.32

6.35

11.67

2557

1 year PM2.5 (Chronic PM)

9.65

3.54

17.79

9.65

0.81

14.25

0.98

9.16

10.14

2557

Temperature

46.52

223.80

90.10

47.90

18.73

113.90

29.30

33.00

62.30

2557

Covariate

Mean

Note: Q1 and Q3 are quartiles. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034664.t002

PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org

4

April 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 4 | e34664

Effects of PM on Hospital Admissions in New-England

higher than the acute effects. Importantly, we continue to see acute
effects independent of the chronic effects. In addition, this analysis
covers all zip codes in New England, not just subset zipcodes locations
near PM2.5 monitors. This represents an important extension of previous
Medicare analyses, since we now have estimates that include suburban,
small town, and rural populations. Finally, the use of a spatiotemporal
model reduces exposure misclassification that exists in, for example
time series studies that use a single exposure metric for daily exposure
in an entire metropolitan area. Such error is a mixture of classical
exposure error, which likely biases the effect estimates downward, and
Berkson error, which increases the confidence interval [39]. The results
from our novel method presented much tighter confidence intervals
compared to the classic time series analysis, indicating that our method
could potentially reduce measurement error. Another advantage our method
adds is the ability to include population that lives far from monitor
compared to the traditional methods One of the key components of this
study is that we showed that by using our prediction models (which
produce daily PM2.5 predictions) we are able to simultaneously examine
short term and long term association with hospital admissions and to do
it for the entire population of New England, avoiding issues of
selection or non-representative samples, and accounting for small area
measures of potential confounders. The putative biological mechanisms
linking both short term and long term exposure to air pollution and CVD
involve direct effects of pollutants on the cardiovascular system,
blood, and lung receptors, and/or indirect effects mediated through
pulmonary oxidative stress and inflammatory responses [40]. The
biological mechanisms linking both short term and long term exposure to
air pollution and respiratory diseases include reduced lung function,
pulmonary inflammation and oxidative stress [41]. Further, an
intervention trial of air filtration for elderly adults reduced
particles levels and reported improved endothelial function [42].
Similarly, a trial comparing blood pressure when subjects were walking
in Beijing with our without a particle filter reported blood pressure
was lower when wearing the filter208. These studies are also supported
by toxicologic indicators of mechanism. For example, a recent study of
mice genetically prone to atherosclerosis and on a high fat western diet
exposed to concentrated particles from the outside air showed that the
particle exposure lead to more atherosclerotic plaque, and increased
macrophages and tissue factor in the plaques, which reduce plaque
stability and increase the risk of a heart attack [43]. Another study,
using a different mouse model of atherosclerosis, documented that
particle exposure increased oxidation of LDL, increased the thickness of
the arterial wall, and promoted plaque growth and instability [44]. A
number of studies have directly linked particle

Results Descriptive statistics stratified by long term pollution (high
and low split by the mean) are presented in Table 1. The majority of
people included in our analyses which were admitted to hospital were
white (84.92%--96.23% across all admission causes) while the average age
was 76.65--80.30 years. Table 2 contains a summary of the predicted
exposures for both the acute exposure (0 day lag) and the chronic
exposure (365 day moving average) across all grid cells in the analysis.
Table 3 presents the estimated percent increase in hospital admissions
for a 10 mg/m3 increase for both short term and long term PM2.5 by cause
of admission and associated 95% confidence intervals. For all
respiratory, for every 10-mg/m3 increase in short term PM2.5 exposure
there is a 0.70 percent increase in admissions (95% CI = 0.35 to 0.52)
while concurrently for every 10-mg/m3 increase in long term PM2.5
exposure there is a 4.22 percent increase in admission (95% CI = 1.06 to
4.75). For CVD, for every10-mg/m3 increase in short term PM2.5 exposure
there is a 1.03 percent increase in admission rate (95% CI = 0.69 to
0.45) while concurrently for every10-mg/m3 increase in long term PM2.5
exposure there is a 3.12 percent increase in admission (95% CI = 0.30 to
4.29). For strokes, for every 10-mg/m3 increase in short term PM2.5
exposure there is a 0.24 percent increase in admissions (95% CI = 20.13
to 0.56) while concurrently for every10-mg/m3 increase in long term
PM2.5 exposure there is a 3.49 percent increase in admissions (95% CI =
0.09 to 5.18). Finally for diabetes, for every10-mg/m3 increase in short
term PM2.5 exposure there is a 0.96 percent increase in admissions (95%
CI = 0.62 to 0.51) while concurrently for every10-mg/m3 increase in long
term PM2.5 exposure there is a 6.33 percent increase in admissions (CI =
3.22 to 4.59). The results from the sensitivity analysis are presented
in table 4. In general the results of the sensitivity analysis were
consistent with the primary analysis for the added spatial variables and
added temporal variable as well as for the different lags (excluding the
acute PM2.5 exposure in lag02). The results from the classic times
series analysis were similar to the main model (1.51 vs 0.72 percent
change) albeit with higher standard error (0.002 vs 0.001) and much
larger CI (0.42--1.65 Vs. 0.35--0.52). The crude and final estimates as
well as the estimates for the model covariates are presented in appendix
S1 and S2.

Discussion In this paper we report, for the first time, that long term
exposure to PM2.5 is associated with increased hospital admissions of
the elderly (aged 65 and older) for all respiratory, CVD, stroke, and
diabetes. As with mortality studies, this long term impact is

Table 3. Estimated percent increase in hospital admissions for a 10
mg/m3 increase for both short term and long term PM2.5 by cause of
admission.

PM2.5 exposure type All Respiratory Percent increase

CVD a

Percent increase

Stroke a

Percent increase

Diabetes a

Percent increase

Short term PM2.5 exposure

0.70 (0.35--0.52)

1.03 (0.69--0.45)

0.24(20.13--0.56)

0.96(0.62-- 0.51)

Long term PM2.5 exposure

4.22(1.06--4.75)

3.12(0.30--4.29)

3.49 (0.09--5.18)

6.33(3.22-- 4.59)

a

Note: aValues are percent. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034664.t003

PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org

5

April 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 4 | e34664

Effects of PM on Hospital Admissions in New-England

Table 4. Sensitivity analysis (estimated percent increase in hospital
admissions for a 10 mg/m3 increase in chronic PM2.5 exposure) for all
respiratory admission causes.

PM2.5 exposure type

All Respiratory-acute PM2.5 Percent increase

a

All Respiratory-chronic PM2.5 Percent increase

Baseline

0.70(0.35--0.52)

4.22(1.06--4.75)

Added SES variable

0.70(0.35--0.52)

3.84(0.67--4.74)

Added temporal variable lag 0

0.58(0.23--0.52)

4.40(1.36--4.56)

Added temporal variable lag 01

0.35(0.01--0.52)

4.65(1.60--4.57)

Added temporal variables lag 02

20.18(20.52 -- 20.52)

5.32(2.25--4.57)

a

Note: aValues are percent. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034664.t004

exposure with ischemia. Wellenius exposed dogs to either filtered air or
concentrated air particles, followed by a temporary occlusion of the
coronary artery. The animals exposed to particles experienced greater
ischemia than those exposed to filtered air [45,46]. Several studies
suggested an enhanced susceptibility of people with diabetes to exposure
to air pollution partly due to inflammatory mechanisms [19,20,47]. In
addition there are reports associating air pollution with incidence of
diabetes [48]. Our estimated associations between short term exposure to
PM2.5 and hospital admissions revealed results qualitatively similar to
those studies previously published analyzing short term PM2.5 and
hospital admissions [10,21,49]. To the best of our knowledge there are
no studies on exposure to long term PM2.5 and hospital admissions.
However our long term exposure results for CVD are in agreement with
those reported by Miller et al. [50], who studied postmenopausal women
without previous CVD in 36 U.S. metropolitan areas from 1994 to 1998.
They estimated that each 10 mg/m3increase in PM2.5 was associated with a
24% increase in the risk of a cardiovascular event (hazard ratio, 1.24;
95% CI = 1.09 to 1.41). Those events would almost certainly have
resulted in hospitalizations. These findings also clarify a previous
apparent inconsistency. Cohort studies of the association of PM2.5 and
deaths from CVD or stroke have reported much larger effect sizes than
the time series studies of PM2.5 and admissions from those causes
[51,52,53,54]. This seems implausible since many of those events result
in hospitalizations. However, these chronic mortality estimates are also
much larger than the time series estimates of the acute effects of
recent PM2.5 exposure on deaths from those causes. The usual explanation
is that chronic exposure produces greater effects because it leads to
cumulative damage, such as atherosclerosis etc. [55,56,57,58,59]. Those
arguments would be equally applicable to the effects of long term
exposure on chronic rates of admissions for these causes. In this paper
we show that such larger effects in fact are seen. A major limitation of
this study is our limited ability to control for individual level
potential confounders, such as socio-economic factors, diet, exercise,
etc. We have used area-based measures of socio-economic factors. To test
the potential for confounding, we

used data from the Normative Aging Study [60,61], a population based
study of an aging cohort, resident in Maine, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire and Rhode Island As a general population of subjects eligible
for Medicare, we think this is a reasonable test of the potential for
confounding. We assigned the same 365 day average exposure to those
participants from our model, and examined the association with
packyears, with physical activity (METS), and with dietary fish intake.
In no case was there a significant association. Another limitation of
the present study is the relatively coarse spatial resolution of 10610
km. However, as satellite remote sensing evolves and progresses, higher
spatial resolution data (363 km and 161 km) should become available
which will further reduce exposure error. Such finer resolution should
enable us to assess more precise estimated daily individual exposure as
they relate to different location such as residence, work place etc. In
conclusion, we have demonstrated how our prediction models perform well
in assessing short term and long term human exposures. Our findings
indicate that hospital admission were associated with both short term
and long term exposure to PM2.5. These findings present new
opportunities to study the effects of both the long and short term
exposure and human health.

Supporting Information Appendix S1 Crude estimates vs. Final model
estimates.

(DOCX) Appendix S2 Estimates of model covariates.

(DOCX)

Acknowledgments The authors want to thank Steven J. Melly, Department of
Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard
University.

Author Contributions Conceived and designed the experiments: IK JS.
Performed the experiments: IK AZ BC. Analyzed the data: IK PK BC AZ JS.
Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: BC. Wrote the paper: IK
JS.

References 1. 2. 3.

4. 

Brunekreef B, Holgate ST (2002) Air pollution and health. The lancet
360: 1233--1242. Pope CA, Dockery DW, Schwartz J (1995) Review of
epidemiological evidence of health effects of particulate air pollution.
Inhalation toxicology 7: 1--18. Schwartz J (1994) Air pollution and
hospital admissions for the elderly in Birmingham, Alabama. Am J
Epidemiol 139: 589.

PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org

6

Spix C, Anderson HR, Schwartz J, Vigotti MA, Letertre A, et al. (1998)
Shortterm effects of air pollution on hospital admissions of respiratory
diseases in Europe: a quantitative summary of APHEA study results.
Archives of Environmental Health: An International Journal 53: 54--64.

April 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 4 | e34664

Effects of PM on Hospital Admissions in New-England

5.  
6.  
7.  
8.  
9.  
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. Liu Y, Park R, Jacob D, Li Q, Kilaru V, et al. (2004) Mapping annual
    mean ground-level PM2. 5 concentrations using Multiangle Imaging
    Spectroradiometer aerosol optical thickness over the contiguous
    United States. J Geophys Res 109: 3269--3278.
34. Kloog I, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J (2011) Assessing
    Temporally and Spatially Resolved PM2. 5 Exposures for
    Epidemiological Studies Using Satellite Aerosol Optical Depth
    Measurements. Atmospheric Environment.
35. NCDC (2010) The national climatic data center data inventories.
36. Census US (2000) U.S. Census of Population and Housing. Government
    Printing Office.
37. Laird N, Olivier D (1981) Covariance analysis of censored survival
    data using log-linear analysis techniques. Journal of the American
    Statistical Association. pp 231--240.
38. Schwartz J, Dockery DW, Neas LM (1996) Is daily mortality associated
    specifically with fine particles? Journal of the Air & Waste
    Management Association (1995) 46: 927.
39. Zeger SL, Thomas D, Dominici F, Samet JM, Schwartz J, et al. (2000)
    Exposure measurement error in time-series studies of air pollution:
    concepts and consequences. Environ Health Perspect 108: 419--426.
40. Brook RD, Franklin B, Cascio W, Hong Y, Howard G, et al. (2004) Air
    pollution and cardiovascular disease. Circulation 109: 2655--2671.
41. Pope CA, Young B, Dockery D (2006) Health effects of fine
    particulate air pollution: lines that connect. Journal of the Air &
    Waste Management Association 56: 709--742.
42. Brauner EV, Forchhammer L, Moller P, Barregard L, Gunnarsen L, et
    al.

2008) Indoor particles affect vascular function in the aged: an air
      filtrationbased intervention study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 177:
      419--425.

43. Sun Q, Yue P, Kirk RI, Wang A, Moatti D, et al. (2008) Ambient air
    particulate matter exposure and tissue factor expression in
    atherosclerosis. Inhal Toxicol 20: 127--137.
44. Soares SR, Carvalho-Oliveira R, Ramos-Sanchez E, Catanozi S, da
    Silva LF, et al. (2009) Air pollution and antibodies against
    modified lipoproteins are associated with atherosclerosis and
    vascular remodeling in hyperlipemic mice. Atherosclerosis 207:
    368--373.
45. Bartoli CR, Wellenius GA, Coull BA, Akiyama I, Diaz EA, et al.
    (2009) Concentrated ambient particles alter myocardial blood flow
    during acute ischemia in conscious canines. Environ Health Perspect
    117: 333--337.
46. Wellenius GA, Coull BA, Godleski JJ, Koutrakis P, Okabe K, et al.
    (2003) Inhalation of concentrated ambient air particles exacerbates
    myocardial ischemia in conscious dogs. Environ Health Perspect 111:
    402--408.
47. Baja ES, Schwartz JD, Wellenius GA, Coull BA, Zanobetti A, et al.
    (2010) Traffic-related air pollution and QT interval: modification
    by diabetes, obesity, and oxidative stress gene polymorphisms in the
    normative aging study. Environ Health Perspect 118: 840--846.
48. Kramer U, Herder C, Sugiri D, Strassburger K, Schikowski T, et al.
    (2010) Traffic-related air pollution and incident type 2 diabetes:
    results from the SALIA cohort study. Environ Health Perspect 118:
    1273--1279.
49. Wellenius GA, Schwartz J, Mittleman MA (2005) Air pollution and
    hospital admissions for ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke among
    Medicare beneficiaries. Stroke 36: 2549.
50. Miller KA, Siscovick DS, Sheppard L, Shepherd K, Sullivan JH, et al.
    (2007) Long-term exposure to air pollution and incidence of
    cardiovascular events in women. New England Journal of Medicine 356:
    447--458.
51. Krewski D, Jerrett M, Burnett RT, Ma R, Hughes E, et al. (2009)
    Extended follow-up and spatial analysis of the American Cancer
    Society study linking particulate air pollution and mortality. Res
    Rep Health Eff Inst: 5--114; discussion 115--136.
52. Laden F, Neas LM, Dockery DW, Schwartz J (2000) Association of fine
    particulate matter from different sources with daily mortality in
    six US cities. Environ Health Perspect 108: 941.
53. Ostro B, Lipsett M, Reynolds P, Goldberg D, Hertz A, et al. (2010)
    Long-term exposure to constituents of fine particulate air pollution
    and mortality: results from the California Teachers Study. Environ
    Health Perspect 118: 363.
54. Puett R, Hart J, Yanosky J, Paciorek C, Schwartz J, et al. (2009)
    Chronic fine and coarse particulate exposure, mortality, and
    coronary heart disease in the Nurses' Health Study. Environ Health
    Perspect 117: 1702.
55. Adar SD, Klein R, Klein BEK, Szpiro AA, Cotch MF, et al. (2010) Air
    pollution and the microvasculature: a cross-sectional assessment of
    in vivo retinal images in the population-based Multi-Ethnic Study of
    Atherosclerosis (MESA). PLoS Medicine 7: e1000372.
56. Bauer M, Moebus S, Mohlenkamp S, Dragano N, Nonnemacher M, et al.

2010) Urban Particulate Matter Air Pollution Is Associated With
      Subclinical Atherosclerosis:: Results From the HNR (Heinz Nixdorf
      Recall) Study. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 56:
      1803--1808.

57. Hansen CS, Sheykhzade M, Moller P, Folkmann JK, Amtorp O, et al.
    (2007) Diesel exhaust particles induce endothelial dysfunction in
    apoE-/-mice. Toxicology and applied pharmacology 219: 24--32.
58. KuÌˆnzli N, Jerrett M, Garcia-Esteban R, BasaganÌƒa X, Beckermann B, et
    al.

2010) Ambient air pollution and the progression of atherosclerosis in
      adults. PLoS One 5: e9096.

59. Sun Q, Wang A, Jin X, Natanzon A, Duquaine D, et al. (2005)
    Long-term air pollution exposure and acceleration of atherosclerosis
    and vascular inflammation

Zanobetti A, Franklin M, Koutrakis P, Schwartz J (2009) Fine particulate
air pollution and its components in association with cause-specific
emergency admissions. Environmental Health 8: 58. Zanobetti A, Schwartz
J, Dockery DW (2000) Airborne particles are a risk factor for hospital
admissions for heart and lung disease. Environ Health Perspect 108:
1071. Dominici F, Peng RD, Bell ML, Pham L, McDermott A, et al. (2006)
Fine particulate air pollution and hospital admission for cardiovascular
and respiratory diseases. Jama 295: 1127. Fusco D, Forastiere F,
Michelozzi P, Spadea T, Ostro B, et al. (2001) Air pollution and
hospital admissions for respiratory conditions in Rome, Italy. European
respiratory journal 17: 1143. Schwartz J (1996) Air pollution and
hospital admissions for respiratory disease. Epidemiology 7: 20--28.
Mann JK, Tager IB, Lurmann F, Segal M, Quesenberry CP Jr., et al. (2002)
Air pollution and hospital admissions for ischemic heart disease in
persons with congestive heart failure or arrhythmia. Environ Health
Perspect 110: 1247. Schwartz J, Morris R (1995) Air pollution and
hospital admissions for cardiovascular disease in Detroit, Michigan. Am
J Epidemiol 142: 23--35. Schwartz J (1997) Air pollution and hospital
admissions for cardiovascular disease in Tucson. Epidemiology 8:
371--377. D'Ippoliti D, Forastiere F, Ancona C, Agabiti N, Fusco D, et
al. (2003) Air pollution and myocardial infarction in Rome: a
case-crossover analysis. Epidemiology 14: 528. Zanobetti A, Schwartz J
(2005) The effect of particulate air pollution on emergency admissions
for myocardial infarction: a multicity case-crossover analysis. Environ
Health Perspect 113: 978--982. Symons J, Wang L, Guallar E, Howell E,
Dominici F, et al. (2006) A casecrossover study of fine particulate
matter air pollution and onset of congestive heart failure symptom
exacerbation leading to hospitalization. Am J Epidemiol 164: 421.
Wellenius GA, Bateson TF, Mittleman MA, Schwartz J (2005) Particulate
air pollution and the rate of hospitalization for congestive heart
failure among Medicare beneficiaries in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Am J
Epidemiol 161: 1030. Ilabaca M, Olaeta I, Campos E, Villaire J,
Tellez-Rojo MM, et al. (1999) Association between levels of fine
particulate and emergency visits for pneumonia and other respiratory
illnesses among children in Santiago, Chile. JOURNAL-AIR AND WASTE
MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION 49: 154--163. Medina-Ramon M, Zanobetti A,
Schwartz J (2006) The effect of ozone and PM10 on hospital admissions
for pneumonia and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a national
multicity study. Am J Epidemiol 163: 579. O'Neill MS, Veves A, Zanobetti
A, Sarnat JA, Gold DR, et al. (2005) Diabetes enhances vulnerability to
particulate air pollution-associated impairment in vascular reactivity
and endothelial function. Circulation 111: 2913. Zanobetti A, Schwartz J
(2001) Are diabetics more susceptible to the health effects of airborne
particles? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 164: 831. Dominici F, Peng RD, Bell
ML, Pham L, McDermott A, et al. (2006) Fine particulate air pollution
and hospital admission for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. Jama
295: 1127--1134. Zanobetti A, Franklin M, Koutrakis P, Schwartz J (2009)
Fine particulate air pollution and its components in association with
cause-specific emergency admissions. Environ Health 8: 58--70. Andersen
ZJ, BÃ¸nnelykke K, Hvidberg M, Jensen SS, Ketzel M, et al. (2011)
Long-term exposure to air pollution and asthma hospitalisations in older
adults: a cohort study. Thorax. Hruba F, Fabianova E, Koppova K,
Vandenberg JJ (2001) Childhood respiratory symptoms, hospital
admissions, and long-term exposure to airborne particulate matter.
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 33.
Oudin A, StroÌˆmberg U, Jakobsson K, Stroh E, Lindgren AG, et al. (2010)
Hospital Admissions for Ischemic Stroke: Does Long-Term Exposure to Air
Pollution Interact with Major Risk Factors. Cerebrovascular Diseases 31:
284--293. Andersen ZJ, Raaschou-Nielsen O, Ketzel M, Jensen SS, Hvidberg
M, et al. (2012) Diabetes Incidence and Long-Term Exposure to Air
Pollution. Diabetes Care 35: 92--98. Gryparis A, Paciorek CJ, Zeka A,
Schwartz J, Coull BA (2009) Measurement error caused by spatial
misalignment in environmental epidemiology. Biostatistics 10: 258--274.
Paciorek CJ, Yanosky JD, Puett RC, Laden F, Suh HH (2009) Practical
largescale spatio-temporal modeling of particulate matter
concentrations. The Annals of Applied Statistics 3: 370--397. USCB
(2000) United States Census Bureau of 2000. US Census Bureau. Engel-Cox
J, Holloman C, Coutant B, Hoff R (2004) Qualitative and quantitative
evaluation of MODIS satellite sensor data for regional and urban scale
air quality. Atmospheric Environment 38: 2495--2509. Gupta P,
Christopher S, Wang J, Gehrig R, Lee Y, et al. (2006) Satellite remote
sensing of particulate matter and air quality assessment over global
cities. Atmospheric Environment 40: 5880--5892. Koelemeijer R, Homan C,
Matthijsen J (2006) Comparison of spatial and temporal variations of
aerosol optical thickness and particulate matter over Europe.
Atmospheric Environment 40: 5304--5315.

PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org

7

April 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 4 | e34664

Effects of PM on Hospital Admissions in New-England

in an animal model. JAMA: the journal of the American Medical
Association 294: 3003. 60. Halonen JI, Zanobetti A, Sparrow D, Vokonas
PS, Schwartz J (2010) Associations between outdoor temperature and
markers of inflammation: a cohort study. Environmental Health 9: 42.

PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org

61. Madrigano J, Baccarelli A, Wright RO, Suh H, Sparrow D, et al.
    (2010) Air pollution, obesity, genes and cellular adhesion
    molecules. Occup Environ Med 67: 312--317.

8

April 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 4 | e34664


