Atmospheric Environment 122 (2015) 409e416

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Atmospheric Environment journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/atmosenv

Estimating daily PM2.5 and PM10 across the complex geo-climate region of
Israel using MAIAC satellite-based AOD data Itai Kloog a, *, Meytar
Sorek-Hamer a, b, Alexei Lyapustin c, Brent Coull d, Yujie Wang e, Allan
C. Just f, Joel Schwartz f, David M. Broday b a

Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel NASA GSFC, Code 613, Greenbelt, MD,
USA d Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA e University of Maryland Baltimore County,
Baltimore, MD, USA f Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H.
Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA b c

h i g h l i g h t s  We estimated daily PM2.5 and PM10 using Novel
MAIAC satellite-based AOD data.  Our Models performed very well with
ﬁts of 0.79 and 0.72 for PM10 and PM2.5, respectively.  Our results
revealed very little bias (Slope of predictions versus withheld
observations ¼ 0.99).  Our model enables reconstruction of long/short
term resolved exposure to PM2.5 and PM10 in Israel.

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history: Received 13 April 2015 Received in revised form 1
October 2015 Accepted 2 October 2015 Available online 8 October 2015

Estimates of exposure to PM2.5 are often derived from geographic
characteristics based on land-use regression or from a limited number of
ﬁxed ground monitors. Remote sensing advances have integrated these
approaches with satellite-based measures of aerosol optical depth (AOD),
which is spatially and temporally resolved, allowing greater coverage
for PM2.5 estimations. Israel is situated in a complex geo-climatic
region with contrasting geographic and weather patterns, including both
dark and bright surfaces within a relatively small area. Our goal was to
examine the use of MODIS-based MAIAC data in Israel, and to explore the
reliability of predicted PM2.5 and PM10 at a high spatiotemporal
resolution. We applied a three stage process, including a daily
calibration method based on a mixed effects model, to predict ground
PM2.5 and PM10 over Israel. We later constructed daily predictions
across Israel for 2003 e2013 using spatial and temporal smoothing, to
estimate AOD when satellite data were missing. Good model performance
was achieved, with out-of-sample cross validation R2 values of 0.79 and
0.72 for PM10 and PM2.5, respectively. Model predictions had little
bias, with cross-validated slopes (predicted vs. observed) of 0.99 for
both the PM2.5 and PM10 models. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study
that utilizes high resolution 1 km MAIAC AOD retrievals for PM
prediction while accounting for geo-climate complexities, such as
experienced in Israel. This novel model allowed the reconstruction of
long- and short-term spatially resolved exposure to PM2.5 and PM10 in
Israel, which could be used in the future for epidemiological studies. ©
2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Air pollution Aerosol optical depth (AOD) Epidemiology PM10
PM2.5 Exposure error High particulate levels MAIAC

1. Introduction Satellite data have been frequently used in recent years
   to

-  Corresponding author. E-mail address: ikloog@bgu.ac.il (I. Kloog).
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.10.004 1352-2310/© 2015
   Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

predict both coarse and ﬁne particulate matter (PM) (Emili et al., 2010;
Chang et al., 2014; Chudnovsky et al., 2014; Hoff and Christopher, 2009;
Kloog et al., 2014a; Lee et al., 2011; SorekHamer et al., 2015). Aerosol
Optical Depth (AOD) from the Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) is a commonly used satellite product for
predicting PM concentrations as it

410

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 122 (2015) 409e416

measures light extinction at given wavelengths due to scattering and
absorption along the measured atmospheric column. AOD has been used
globally over areas with different characteristics showing a range of
results, e.g. Northeast USA (Kloog et al., 2011, 2012) - a relatively
dark and vegetated area; Lombardy, Italy (Nordio et al., 2013); and
Israel e a Mediterranean region characterized by a high percentage of
bright surfaces, e.g. desert (SorekHamer et al., 2015). In particular,
Israel experiences a complex geo-climatic variation, with different
geographic and weather patterns within a relatively small area, e.g.
desert conditions in the south, snowcapped mountains in the north,
coastal environment, densely populated metropolitan areas, vegetated
regions, and large differences in height above the sea level that range
from 417 m to 1204 m (Erell et al., 2003; Kaﬂe and Bruins, 2009). The
coastal region holds a large part of the population along with pollution
sources. The latter, combined with varying meteorological conditions,
affects the region air quality (Levy et al., 2008). Dust, transported to
the region from the Sahara desert and the Arabian peninsula during the
winter and the transition seasons contributes signiﬁcantly to the total
PM load in Israel (Ganor et al., 2009; SorekHamer et al., 2013a).
Similarly, transboundary transport of anthropogenic sulphates and
nitrates from southern and eastern Europe is a main source of PM2.5
loading (Asaf et al. 2008). In Israel, the PM2.5/PM10 ratio demonstrates
clearly that the PM2.5e10 fraction dominates the ambient particulate
matter in days affected by dust, with ratios of about 0.3. In contrast,
in days not affected by dust this ratio equals ~0.5 (Sorek-Hamer et al.,
2013a), which is nevertheless smaller that ratios that are observed in
the Eastern US or Europe, 0.7e0.8. The Israeli PM2.5 monitoring network
is distributed very heterogeneously. To overcome the relatively sparse
surface monitoring network available in Israel, Sorek-Hamer et al.
(2015) have used AOD products from MODIS with a fairly coarse spatial
resolution (10 km) to estimate PM across Israel. Both the Dark Target
(DT) and the Deep Blue (DB) algorithms for AOD retrieval were used to
predict ground PM2.5 using mixed effects models. The best PM2.5
prediction was obtained using the AODDB product, presenting a R2 of
0.45. Using the AODDB product signiﬁcantly increased the spatiotemporal
availability of the AOD over the Israeli bright surface area and
improved PM2.5 prediction relative to using the more common AODDT
retrievals. The varying daily relationship between MODIS based AOD and
ground PM2.5 have been shown in many studies (Kloog et al., 2014a;
Chudnovsky et al. 2013; Lee et al., 2011). This daily varying
relationship can be attributed to differences in particle composition,
daily variability of the planetary boundary layer (PBL) structure and
height, and changing relative humidity and the aerosol vertical
concentration proﬁle. A single calibration slope between PM2.5 and AOD
is not well suited for capturing these daily changing relationships. We
thus make use of a mixed model approach which allows for the regression
intercepts and slopes to vary daily to control for this inherent
day-to-day variability in the AOD-PM2.5 relationship caused by
time-varying parameters. Mixed model regressions are powerful tools that
incorporate both spatial and temporal predictors as well as day-speciﬁc
random-effects. The mixed model approach was used successfully in
different geoclimatic regions. Previous studies that used the recently
developed Multi Angle Implementation of Atmospheric Correction (MAIAC)
retrieval algorithm (1 km spatial resolution) revealed improved PM
predictions and large spatiotemporal availability (Kloog et al., 2011;
Lee et al., 2011; Chudnovsky et al., 2013, 2014; Nordio et al., 2013).
Similar results were obtained also when using MODIS/ MAIAC retrievals
within different regression models (Chang et al., 2014; Hu et al.,
2014). Nonetheless, although MAIAC AOD was

successfully used for estimating PM2.5 concentrations in North America,
it has rarely been tested for estimating PM10 concentrations nor in more
complex geographic and climatic regions as Israel (e.g. Emili et al.,
2011). In this study we examined the use of the highly spatiotemporal
resolved MAIAC data in Israel, a complex area with diverse topography
and climate conditions, exploring its PM2.5 and PM10 predictions
reliability. We applied all the three stages of the daily calibration
method, based on a mixed effects model, to predict ground PM2.5 and PM10
over Israel. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that utilizes
MAIAC data for PM prediction while accounting for geo-climatic
complexity such as experienced in Israel.

2. Material and methods 2.1. Study domain The study region included the
   entire state of Israel (Fig. 1) apart from its most southern region,
   where population is very scarce and monitoring data is unavailable.
   Since our model is aimed for use in environmental epidemiology we
   choose to limit already computationally intensive model runs to
   populated regions in Israel. Israel is located along the eastern
   Mediterranean coast, between 29.5 and 33.5 N. Climatically, Israel
   is situated in the subtropical drylands and is characterized by a hot
   and dry summer and a single rain season (NovembereMarch). In spite of
   its small area (~420 km

Fig. 1. Map of the study area showing all PM2.5 and PM10 monitoring
stations across the study area.

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 122 (2015) 409e416

411

from north to south and a maximum width of ~110 km), it experiences
sharp climatic and geographic gradients, both in the northsouth and the
eastewest directions. Hence, the study region includes very diverse
geographic and climatic regions, including large rural areas, large
forested regions, water bodies, mountains and the Mediterranean coastal
plains.

2.2. Satellite data One of the main MODIS aerosol products is spectral
AOD. This level 2 MODIS product is available daily across the entire
globe. The product has been utilized in many studies, mainly using the
“Dark Target” (DT) MODIS algorithm over land that provides a 10 km
resolution AOD (Kloog et al. 2011; Levy et al. 2007; Remer et al. 2005).
Recent studies evaluated the Deep Blue algorithm and found that it
performs better over bright surfaces both with respect to retrievals
availability as well as for PM2.5 and PM10 estimation (Sayer et al.
2013, 2014; Sorek-hamer et al. 2015). MAIAC, developed by Lyapustin and
colleagues, is a new processing algorithm that provides a high 1 km
resolution AOD product (Lyapustin et al. 2011a,b). The MAIAC algorithm
begins with gridding the data to a ﬁxed 1 km grid and accumulating of up
to 16 days of measurements. The algorithm uses a time series analysis
and processes groups of pixels to derive the surface bidirectional
reﬂectance distribution function (BRDF) and aerosol parameters over both
dark vegetated surfaces and bright surfaces, without the assumptions
typically used by the current MODIS operational processing algorithms.
The spatio-temporal analysis also helps MAIAC's cloud mask in augmenting
traditional pixellevel cloud detection techniques. MAIAC's high
resolution, which is important in many applications such as air
pollution studies, may bring new information about aerosol sources and,
potentially, their strength. Validation against AOT obtained at Aerosol
Robotic Network (AERONET) stations in several U.S. West Coast sites
showed that the MAIAC and MODIS algorithms have very similar accuracy
over dark and vegetated surfaces but that MAIAC shows, in general,
better accuracy over brighter surfaces as a result of its spectral
retrieval of the regression coefﬁcients and the explicit BRDF
characterization (Lyapustin et al. 2011b). Due to its generic nature and
developed angular correction, MAIAC can retrieve AOD over bright
deserts, as demonstrated for the Solar Village AERONET site in Saudi
Arabia (Lyapustin et al. 2011b). This ability of MAIAC is crucial in
areas such as Israel, where large regions are characterized as desert.
In this work we used MAIAC AOD over Israel based on MODIS Aqua L1B data
for the years 2003e2013 (generated on 01/10/2014). The correlation
between MAIAC (Aqua) AOD and AERONET AOD has been locally evaluated with
data from the Nes Ziona AERONET station located in the central-southern
part of the country, in an urban area (long:34.78917, lat:31.92250). The
data from both AOD sources are for the years 2003e2013. The Pearson
correlation (r ¼ 0.85) was calculated with hourly MAIAC and AERONET AOD
data (http://aeronet.gsfc.nasa.gov/ new\_web/aerosols.html), relative to
the Aqua overpass time, from the closest grid cell (long:34.792,
lat:31.926) (Fig. 2). The raw MAIAC data went through additional
screening. We applied thresholds based on MAIAC guidelines which use
quality assurance (QA) ﬂags and uncertainty values (UN) to then exclude
pixels with erroneous AOD values. The QA and UN data allows us to better
ﬁlter out pixels that are cloud contaminated, have issues with surface
brightness, snow etc. The mean retrieval per pixel across the study area
for all years was 2682. The ﬁrst quartile (Q1) had 2513 observations
while the third quartile (Q3) had 2984 observations.

Fig. 2. Correlation between MAIAC (Aqua) AOD and hourly AERONET AOD,
relative to the Aqua overpass time, from the Nes Ziona station. Both AOD
datasets are for the period 2003e2013. There are only 1470 days (~36%)
with both available AOD sources at the Aqua overpass time, while 25 of
them observe AOD above 0.5.

2.3. Ground monitoring data Israel's PM ground monitor network is
distributed heterogeneously mainly around four urban areas in the
coastal plain: Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, Haifa, and Ashdod (Fig. 1). Daily
PM2.5 and PM10 concentrations across Israel for the years 2003e2013 were
obtained from the Technion Center of Excellence in Exposure Science and
Environmental Health (TCEEH) air pollution monitoring database (TAPMD).
Monitoring in Israel is conducted by different local Municipalities
Associations for the Environment (MAE) and regulated by the Ministry of
Environmental Protection (MoEP). The measurements are performed using
TEOM™ continuous monitoring instruments that are operated and maintained
according to the US-EPA guidelines, with a typical accuracy of ±5% (EPA,
2013). Since data in some stations were not collected continuously
throughout the study period, we only used monitors with at least 20%
yearly data availability. Overall, we used data from 45 PM2.5 monitoring
stations and 41 PM10 monitoring stations with unique locations, which
operated during the study period. 2.4. Spatial and temporal predictors
of PM2.5 Because the relationship between PM2.5 and AOD depends on the
optical properties, size distribution, and vertical proﬁle of the
aerosol, which change daily and vary spatially, we ﬁt a calibration
regression that incorporates predictors of these properties. Since
available covariates do not capture all of these attributes, we allowed
the calibration coefﬁcients to vary on a daily and regionally basis, as
described below. Spatial and temporal covariates were generated using
Qgis ver. 2.6 (Qgis, 2014), ArcMap ver. 10.2 (ESRI, 2014) and R
statistical software ver. 3.12 (R, 2014). The spatial predictors used in
this work are: population density, elevation, trafﬁc density, distance
from major roads, distance from the shoreline and the percent of open
space. These variables were chosen because they can serve as surrogates
for emissions of particles with different optical properties.
Speciﬁcally: 2.4.1. Population density Population density data were
obtained from the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics (ICBS, 2014). We
calculated the weightaveraged population for each 1 km grid cell based
on the tracts intersecting these grid cells.

412

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 122 (2015) 409e416

2.4.2. Elevation Elevation data were obtained from the ASTER global
digital elevation model (GDEM) data (ASTER, 2014). ASTER GDEM coverage
spans from 83 north latitude to 83 south, encompassing 99 percent of
Earth's landmass. The spatial resolution is 30 m. Since there are
elevation contrasts across the entire country we used elevation as a
spatial predictor. 2.4.3. Trafﬁc density Road data were obtained from
the Israel Survey Bureau mapping service (MAPI) and included all the
roads across Israel, from one lane to the country major roads (MAPI,
2013). We calculated the total road density using the line density tool,
which is part of the ArcGIS spatial analyst toolbox. It calculates the
magnitude (density) per unit area (1 km) of polyline features (all the
roads) that pass within 1 km radius around each 1 km cell centroid
throughout the study area. The road density was then intersected with
the 1 km grids resulting in an attribute table containing the road
density in each 1 km grid cell. 2.4.4. Distance from major
roads/shoreline We calculated distances from the centroids of our grid
to both the Israel shoreline and major roads across Israel using Qgis.
These distances (in meters) were attributed to each centroid across the
study area. 2.4.5. Percent of open space We used the ICBS land use
dataset to calculated the percentage of open space in each 1 km grid
cell across the study area (ICBS, 2007). The percent of open space
included all the following areas: large-lot single-family housing units,
parks, forestry, and vegetated areas used for recreation, soil erosion
control, or esthetic purposes. The temporal predictors used in this work
are: 2.4.6. Meteorological data All meteorological variables used in the
analysis were obtained through the TAPMD. Grid cells were matched to the
closest weather station with available meteorological variables (24 h
means). We used the following daily mean meteorological variables: air
temperature, relative humidity and rainfall. 2.4.7. Dust event
classiﬁcation In order to capture the presence of dust events in the
region, all observations throughout the study period were classiﬁed as
affected by dust (dust ﬂag ¼ 1) or as not affected by dust (dust ﬂag ¼
0). The daily dust ﬂag was assigned according to an extended scheme of
Sorek Hamer et al. (2013a).

2.5. Statistical methods All modeling was done using the R statistical
software version 3.12 (R, 2014) and SAS version 9.3 (SAS, 2013). Our aim
was to generate spatio-temporally resolved daily PM10 and PM2.5
predictions in each 1 km grid cell for the entire 2003e2013 period. For
this, we developed a series of processes (Fig. 3). First, calibration of
the gridded AOD data was performed against PM10 and PM2.5 monitoring
data that were collected within 1 km of the AOD value. The calibration
stage adjusted for all the spatiotemporal predictors similar to classic
land use regressions (LUR). Second, using this model daily PM10 and
PM2.5 concentrations were calculated in grid cells with AOD data but
without available monitoring data. Third, daily PM10 and PM2.5 in grid
cells with no AOD data for that day were estimated, taking into account
the region-speciﬁc association between grid-cell AOD and PM levels as
well as the association between PM10 and PM2.5 levels in any given grid
with that in neighboring grid cells. Missing MAIAC AOD data are not
random, possible reasons for the missing AOD retrievals that may be
associated with ground level PM include dust storms, snow, and heavy
cloud coverage. Thus, in the calibration process we incorporated inverse
probability weighting (IPW) to potentially avoid bias in the regression
coefﬁcient estimates, and thus in the resulting predictions. The IPW
approach up-weights observed grid cell-day combinations with covariate
patterns that are more often missing AOD data. To obtain these weights,
we ﬁtted the following logistic regression model for the probability (p)
of observing an AOD value in cell i on day j for each year:

 ln

b p b 1p

2.4.9. PBL Daily mixing height of the planetary boundary layer (PBL)
were obtained from modeled data of the National Center for Scientiﬁc
Research (CNRS) at a 50 km spatial resolution (CNRS, 2013). PBL can vary
with the wind speed and can inﬂuence the concentration and the pollutant
vertical proﬁle (Oke, 1987).

¼b0 þb1 Elevationi þb2 PBLij þb3 Temperatureij

1) 

þ Month  IPW ¼

1 b p

 (2)

where (p) is the probability for availability of AOD in each day in each
grid cell in each year. It should be noted that there were no IPW
observations which had a disproportionate inﬂuence in the yearly models.
Since the daily PM-AOD calibration factors can vary spatially across the
complex Israeli area, we divided Israel into 5 regions based on
geography and climate (Herut et al. 2000). The day-speciﬁc intercept and
AOD random effects in the model are nested within the geographical
regions of the study. The mixed model calibration process was performed
using the lme4 package in R (Bates et al. 2014):

PMij ¼ ða þ uj þgjðregÞ Þ þ ðb1 þvj þ hjðregÞ Þ AODij þ

2.4.8. NDVI We used the publicly available monthly MODIS NDVI
(Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) product (MOD13A3) at 1 km
spatial resolution. The monthly resolution was chosen under the
assumption that NDVI values do not change considerably within a month
period except for the periods of spring green-up and fall senescence.



6 X

g1m X1mi þ

m¼1

6 X

g2m X2mj þ εij

3) 

m¼1

 ðuj vj kj Þ  N½ð0; 0 Þ; s ðgjðregÞ ; hjðregÞ Þ  N½ð0; 0Þ; sreg 
where PMij is the measured PM10 or PM2.5 concentration at spatial site i
on day j; a and uj are the ﬁxed and random (day-speciﬁc) intercepts,
respectively, AODij is the AOD value in the grid cell corresponding to
site i on day j; b1 and vj are the ﬁxed and dayspeciﬁc random slopes,
respectively. X1mi is the value of the m-th spatial predictor at site i
(i.e. population density, percent of open space, distance to main roads,
elevation, and trafﬁc density). X2mj is the value of the m-th temporal
predictor on day j (i.e. PBL height,

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 122 (2015) 409e416

413

Fig. 3. Flowchart illustrating the model steps for obtaining a complete
cover of PM2.5 prediction over the study area.

NDVI, temperature, relative humidity and dust classiﬁcation). The terms
gj(reg) and hj(reg) are the daily random intercepts and AOD slopes
speciﬁc to each study area region, nested within the overall random
effects uj and vj. We assume that s is a 3 x 3 diagonal matrix with
diagonal elements s2 u , s2 v , s2 k , and sreg is a 2 x 2 diagonal
matrix with diagonal elements s2 g , s2 h . In the second stage, the
above model is used to predict PM10 and PM2.5 in each day and grid cell
for which MAIAC AOD is available. In the third stage, we used the
AOD-PMx e relationships to estimate daily PM10 or PM2.5 in all the grid
cells across Israel, i.e. even in those where MAIAC AOD data were
missing. This was achieved by ﬁtting a generalized additive mixed model
(GAMM; Wood, 2006) with a thin plate spline (Wood, 2003), which is a
smooth function of latitude and longitude (using the grid cell
centroids) and a random intercept. Moreover, we created discrete 30 km
buffers around each AOD cell and calculated the daily mean PM10 and
PM2.5 from the stations in the 30 km buffer around each grid cell, as a
predictor of PM10 and PM2.5 on that day in that grid cell. To allow for
temporal variations in the spatial correlation, we ﬁtted a separate
spatial surface for each bi-monthly period in each year. Using this
method provides additional information about the concentrations in the
missing grid cells that classic interpolation does not provide.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁtted the following semiparametric regression model:

PredPMij ¼ ða þ ui Þ þ ðb1 þvi Þ MPMij þ sðXi ; Yi ÞkðjÞ þεij ;

4) 

First, we used a mixed model to estimate the region and day speciﬁc
slopes. Hence, the only parameters we are estimating are the covariances
of the random effects, S and SREG. Second we validated our models using
ten-folds out-of-sample cross validation (CV) techniques (Chudnovsky et
al. 2014; Kloog et al. 2014b). We randomly divide our data into 90%
training and 10% evaluation datasets ten independent times, using for
the evaluation the model that has been ﬁtted for the training set. Only
terms that increased the CV R2 were kept in the model. To test our
results for bias we regressed the measured PM value for a given site and
day against the corresponding predicted value from the 90% sample that
excluded that monitor. Model prediction accuracy is estimated by
calculating the square root of the mean squared prediction errors
(RMSPE). In addition, we calculated a spatial RMSPE using a model that
contained only the spatial components, to make it more comparable to the
commonly used monthly/yearly LUR models (Eeftens et al. 2012a, 2012b;
Yanosky et al. 2008). As a sensitivity analysis, we also tested whether
our models were improved, by using the local spatial and temporal
predictors, as compared to a simple AOD calibration model in which AOD
is regressed only against PM2.5. Thus, in addition to our main model, we
also report ﬁts for an AOD-only model, a Land use and Met model, an AOD
and land use model, and an AOD and temporal predictors model. Finally,
we explored the model performance for the cold season (winter months)
and warm season (summer months) separately.

ðui vi Þ  ½ð0; 0Þ; Ub 

3. Results

where PredPMij is the predicted PM10 or PM2.5 concentration at a grid
cell i on a day j based on the calibrated model (predicted PM at
available AOD points); MPMij is the mean PM in the relevant 30 km buffer
for site i on a day j; a and ui are the ﬁxed and grid-cell speciﬁc
random intercepts, respectively; b1 and vi are the ﬁxed and random
slopes, respectively. Xi,and Yi are the longitude and latitude of the
centroid of grid cell i, respectively, and s(Xi,Yi)k(j) is a smooth
function of the location (modeled by thin plate splines) speciﬁc to the
bi-monthly period k(j) in which day j falls (that is, a separate spatial
smooth was ﬁtted for each bi-monthly period). Running a calibration
model with a large number of parameters runs the risk of over ﬁtting. We
used two approaches to avoid this.

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on the PM10 and PM2.5 ground
monitoring data. The mean PM across Israel from all the monitoring
stations during the entire study period (2003e2013) was 23.13 and 53.05
mg/m3 for PM2.5 and PM10, respectively. Table 2 presents the overall
spatial and temporal model ﬁts (R2) for 2003e2013 for all the
sensitivity analyses. Model ﬁts were better using the full model
following the calibration process, improving the prediction accuracy
both temporally and spatially (temporal R2 of 0.84 and spatial R2 of
0.89). Table 3 summarizes the results from the calibration stage
(process 1) for both the PM2.5 and PM10 models. The models presented
relatively high cross-validated (CV) ﬁts across the challenging study
area for both PM2.5 and PM10. For

414

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 122 (2015) 409e416

Table 1 Descriptive statistics of the PM10 and PM2.5 records across the
study area in the years of 2003e2013. Station

Mean

Min

Max

Median

SD

IQR

Q1

Q3

Days of data available (all stations)

PM10 (mg/m3) PM2.5 (mg/m3)

53.05 23.13

0.01 0.01

3222.73 1676.01

38.62 19.46

65.76 25.27

25.40 11.87

28.60 14.33

54.00 26.20

72,778 94,094

Note: Q1 and Q3 are quartiles.

4. Discussion

Table 2 Coefﬁcient of determination (R2) of the various models developed
in this study for predicting PM2.5. Model

Overall R2

Spatial R2

Temporal R2

LU þ MET AOD AOD þ MET AOD þ LU AOD þ MET þ LU

0.75 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.84

0.61 0.76 0.74 0.77 0.89

0.76 0.78 0.77 0.70 0.84

To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that uses high resolution daily
PM2.5 and PM10 models in Israel. We developed and validated models to
predict daily PM2.5 and PM10 concentrations at a 1 km resolution across
Israel, allowing us to better estimate long-term daily PM exposure both
at urban and rural areas. A good model performance has been shown across
the extremely challenging geo-climatic characteristics of Israel,
incorporating many different climatic zones (e.g. coastal, mountain,
urban, desert) in a relatively small area (~20,000 km2). The models
developed in this study perform signiﬁcantly better than any other model
available to-date for Israel (Table 3). Several other regions with
complex conditions have been studied previously in relation to using
satellite aerosol products for PM prediction, in particular the San
Joaquin Valley (SJV), central California, which experiences similar
geo-climate conditions as in Israel apart from major dust outbreaks.
Yet, these previous studies estimated hourly/daily PM concentrations in
SJV based on MODIS AOD (10 km) (Rosen et al. 2006; Sorek-Hamer et al.
2013b; Strawa et al. 2013). In particular, Rosen et al. demonstrated an
improved simple linear agreement between hourly PM2.5 concentrations at
two monitoring sites and MODIS AOD at a 5 km resolution relative to the
standard operational MODIS 10 km AOD product (R2 ¼ 0.59 and R2 ¼ 0.05,
respectively). In China, another area with intricate characterization, a
geographic weighted regression (GWR) model has been recently used (Song
et al. 2014), showing a reasonable and representative spatial pattern of
regional variability of PM2.5, similar to that from ground measurements.
Although the GWR model offers promise for accurate large scale PM2.5
monitoring, Song and colleagues recommend further research on the
integration of more model predictors (e.g. land use, season) and the use
of higher satellite spatial resolution. Our results show that PM10
calibrated better with MAIAC compared to PM2.5. This could be due to (a)
the daily PM concentrations in Israel show a major coarse fraction
(PM2.5e10), with mineral dust and sea salt the major sources of
naturally occurring coarse-mode aerosols (Levin et al. 2005). The
contribution of the coarse mode is evident from the ratio of PM2.5 to
PM10 concentrations in stations that monitor both PM fractions. The
annual average ratio is about 50%, and during dust storms it decreases
to 30% (Ganor et al. 2010; Sorek-Hamer et al. 2013b). These ratios are
much smaller than those evident in north Europe and USA, i.e. in regions
for which most of the AOD-PM studies have been performed to date. (b)
There are many more PM10 monitoring stations than PM2.5 monitoring
stations in Israel (and they also started to

PM10, the model presents a mean CV R2 of 0.79 and a CV slope of almost
one (slope of observed vs. predicted of 0.99), suggesting little bias of
the PM10 model. The models also perform well when looking at the spatial
and temporal components: for the temporal model the CV R2 was 0.79 and
for the spatial model the CV R2 was 0.76. The CV RMSPE of the
calibration was 25.10 mg/m3 while the spatial RMSPE (which is a RMSPE
similar to traditional LUR RMSPE) was 0.78 mg/m3. This is considerably
less than the observed variability in PM10 concentrations across Israel,
which ranged in the study period from 1 mg/m3 to 3222 mg/m3 (mean of
53.05 mg/m3). The ﬁnal model also performed well, with a mean R2 of 0.82
e a rather high value considering that the model predicted
concentrations even when satellite AOD data were unavailable. For PM2.5
the model presented a mean CV R2 of 0.72 and a CV slope of, again,
almost one (slope of observed vs. predicted of 0.99), showing little
bias of the CV models. The CV R2 of the temporal model was 0.71 and the
CV R2 of the spatial model was 0.84. The CV RMSPE of the calibration was
8.53 mg/m3 while the spatial RMSPE was 1.31 mg/m3 (PM2.5 ranged from 1
mg/m3 to 793 mg/m3). The performance of the ﬁnal model was, again, very
good, with a mean R2 of 0.81. The season-speciﬁc models revealed that
the model performed slightly better during the summer period: for PM10
the CV R2 was 0.82 and 0.73 for the summer and winter, respectively,
whereas for PM2.5 the CV R2 was 0.72 and 0.64 for the summer and winter,
respectively. Fig. 4 shows the spatial pattern of the predicted PM2.5
and PM10, averaged over the entire study period. Mean predicted PM2.5
concentrations range between 16.63 mg/m3 and 30.60 mg/m3. Mean predicted
PM10 concentrations range between 43.50 mg/m3 and 71.27 mg/m3. Table 4
demonstrates the differences between the mean measured and predicted
PM2.5 concentrations in three main metropolitan areas- Haifa, Tel-Aviv,
and Jerusalem.

Table 3 Cross -validated (CV) PM2.5 and PM10 model performances of the
calibrated models (using the training datasets) for the entire study
period of 2003e2013. Model PM10 PM2.5 c PM10 c PM2.5 a b c

R2 0.79 0.72 0.69 0.45

Intercepta 0.11 ± 0.25 0.24 ± 0.12

Slopea 0.99 ± 0.01 0.99 ± 0.01

Spatial R2 0.76 0.84

Presented as parameter estimate ± SE from a linear regression of
observations versus predictions. Root of the mean squared prediction
error. Sorek-Hamer et al. (2015).

Temporal R2

RMSPEb

Spatial RMSPEb

0.79 0.71

25.10 mg/m 8.53 mg/m3 27.92 mg/m3 12.06 mg/m3 3

0.78 mg/m3 1.31 mg/m3

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 122 (2015) 409e416

415

Fig. 4. AOD-based predictions of the 2003e2013 mean PM2.5 and PM10
concentrations in each 1  1 km grid cell across Israel.

Table 4 Comparing the measured mean PM2.5 concentrations to the
predicted PM2.5 concentrations in the Tel-Aviv, Jerusalem, and Haifa
areas for the whole study period (2003e2013). Tel-Aviv Mean measured
PM2.5 Mean predicted PM2.5

Haifa

23.38 mg/m 21.80 mg/m3 3

19.36 mg/m 18.8 mg/m3

Jerusalem 3

23.71 mg/m3 22.58 mg/m3

report earlier), which may affect the model performance. (c) Finally,
the TEOM™ monitoring devices used for PM2.5 and PM10 monitoring in
Israel require conditioning of the aerosol before the measurement takes
place. This conditioning may affect the particulate content of adsorbed
semi volatile compounds, VOCs, which are normally found in larger
amounts in the ﬁne fraction (Long et al. 2005). This may lead to
underestimation of the true PM concentrations, especially for PM2.5,
which may explain why we got better agreement for PM10. Our model can be
used in various disciplines for estimating PM, and may be particularly
useful for environmental epidemiology studies. Robust and validated air
pollution exposure data are missing in Israel and our PM2.5 and PM10
predictions could allow studying both acute and chronic effects in the
entire population, rather than in a small sample as commonly done in
current epidemiological studies. However, there are several limitations
to our models that should be noted. First, although our 1 km resolution
predictions are the

ﬁnest resolution of AOD data available from MODIS/MAIAC, it may still
not capture the effects of the very local sources, such as busy highways
(which scale is much smaller than 1 km). Another limitation is the lack
of data on the composition of the PM estimates. Future analyses may
allow us to develop models to estimate exposure to speciﬁc PM
components. Moreover, because our model uses satellite measurements, it
cannot forecast future concentrations. Thus, the beneﬁt for
environmental policy may be primarily through understanding past and
current exposure patterns, quantifying the impacts of previous
interventions, and for studying PMrelated acute and chronic health
effects. Future improvement of this model may beneﬁt from further
developments of the MAIAC algorithm and combine other AOD measures from
the two MODIS sensors on Aqua and Terra satellites. In summary, this is
the ﬁrst study that utilizes MAIAC AOD for PM2.5 and PM10 prediction
while controlling for the geo-climatic complexities of Israel. The new
model allowed us to reconstruct spatially resolved long-term daily
average concentrations of PM2.5 and PM10 in Israel.

Acknowledgments We would like to thank the Environment and Health Fund,
Israel, for supporting M.S.H with a doctoral fellowship. The authors
would also like to thank Rakefet Shafran-Natan and Ilan Levy for their
help with data collection.

416

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 122 (2015) 409e416

References Asaf, D., Pedersen, D., Peleg, M., Matveev, V., Luria, M.,
2008. Evaluation of background levels of air pollutants over Israel.
Atmos. Environ. 42, 8453e8463. ASTER, 2014. ASTER Global Digital
Elevation Map. Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., Walker, S., 2014.
lme4: Linear Mixed-effects Models Using Eigen and S4. Chang, H.H., Hu,
X., Liu, Y., 2014. Calibrating MODIS aerosol optical depth for
predicting daily PM2.5 concentrations via statistical downscaling. J.
Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 24, 398e404. Chudnovsky, A., Tang, C.,
Lyapustin, A., Wang, Y., Schwartz, J., Koutrakis, P., 2013. A critical
assessment of high-resolution aerosol optical depth retrievals for ﬁne
particulate matter predictions. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 13, 10907e10917.
Chudnovsky, A.A., Koutrakis, P., Kloog, I., Melly, S., Nordio, F.,
Lyapustin, A., et al., 2014. Fine particulate matter predictions using
high resolution aerosol optical depth (AOD) retrievals. Atmos. Environ.
89, 189e198. CNRS, 2013. Modeled Planetary Boundary Layer Data. Eeftens,
M., Beelen, R., de, Hoogh K., Bellander, T., Cesaroni, G., Cirach, M.,
et al., 2012a. Development of land use regression models for PM2.5,
PM2.5 absorbance, PM10 and PMcoarse in 20 European study areas; results
of the ESCAPE project. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 11195e11205.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es301948k. Eeftens, M., Tsai, M.-Y., Ampe, C.,
Anwander, B., Beelen, R., Bellander, T., et al., 2012b. Spatial
variation of PM2.5, PM10, PM2.5 absorbance and PMcoarse concentrations
between and within 20 European study areas and the relationship with NO2
results of the ESCAPE project. Atmos. Environ. 62, 303e317.
http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.08.038. Emili, E., Lyapustin,
A., Wang, Y., Popp, C., Korkin, S., Zebisch, M., Wunderle, S., Petitta,
M., 2011. High spatial resolution aerosol retrieval with MAIAC:
application to mountain regions. J. Geophys. Res. 116, D23211. Emili,
E., Popp, C., Petitta, M., Rifﬂer, M., Wunderle, S., Zebisch, M., 2010.
PM10 remote sensing from geostationary SEVIRI and polar-orbiting MODIS
sensors over the complex terrain of the European Alpine region. Remote
Sens. Environ. 114 (11), 2485e2499. EPA, 2013. Quality Assurance
Handbook for Air Pollution Measurement Systems Volume II Ambient Air
Quality Monitoring Program. EPA-454/B-13-003. Erell, E., Portnov, B.A.,
Etzion, Y., 2003. Mapping the potential for climate-conscious design of
buildings. Build. Environ. 38, 271e281. ESRI, 2014. ArcGIS. Ganor, E.,
Stupp, A., Alpert, P., 2009. A method to determine the effect of mineral
dust aerosols on air quality. Atmos. Environ. 43, 5463e5468. Ganor, E.,
Stupp, A., Osetinsky, I., Alpert, P., 2010. Synoptic classiﬁcation of
lower troposphere proﬁles for dust days. J. Geophys. Res. 115
http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1029/2009jd012638. Herut, B., Starinsky, A., Katz,
A., Rosenfeld, D., 2000. Relationship between the acidity and chemical
composition of rainwater and climatological conditions along a
transition zone between large deserts and Mediterranean climate. Isr.
Atmos. Environ. 34, 1281. Hoff, R.M., Christopher, S.A., 2009. Remote
sensing of particulate pollution from space: have we reached the
promised land? J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc. 59, 645e675. Hu, X., Waller,
L.A., Lyapustin, A., Wang, Y., Al-Hamdan, M.Z., Crosson, W.L., et al.,
2014. Estimating ground-level PM2.5 concentrations in the Southeastern
United States using MAIAC AOD retrievals and a two-stage model. Remote
Sens. Environ. 140, 220e232.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2013.08.032. ICBS, 2007. Israel Central
Bureau of Statistics Land Use Dataset. ICBS, 2014. Population, by
District, Sub-district and Religion. Kaﬂe, H.K., Bruins, H.J., 2009.
Climatic trends in Israel 1970e2002: warmer and increasing aridity
inland. Clim. Chang. 96, 63e77. Kloog, I., Chudnovsky, A.A., Just, A.C.,
Nordio, F., Koutrakis, P., Coull, B.A., et al., 2014a. A new hybrid
spatio-temporal model for estimating daily multi-year PM2.5
concentrations across Northeastern USA using high resolution aerosol
optical depth data. Atmos. Environ. 95, 581e590. Kloog, I., Koutrakis,
P., Coull, B.A., Lee, H.J., Schwartz, J., 2011. Assessing temporally and
spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological studies using
satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos. Environ. 45,
6267e6275. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2011.08.066. Kloog, I.,
Nordio, F., Coull, B.A., Schwartz, J., 2012. Incorporating local land
use regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model of
spatiotemporal PM2.5 exposures in the Mid-Atlantic states. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 46, 11913e11921. Kloog, I., Nordio, F., Coull, B.A., Schwartz,
J., 2014b. Predicting spatiotemporal mean air temperature using MODIS
satellite surface temperature measurements across the Northeastern USA.
Remote Sens. Environ. 150, 132e139.

Lee, H.J., Liu, Y., Coull, B.A., Schwartz, J., Koutrakis, P., 2011. A
novel calibration approach of MODIS AOD data to predict PM2.5
concentrations. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 11, 7991e8002. Levin, Z., Teller, A.,
Ganor, E., Yin, Y., 2005. On the interactions of mineral dust, seasalt
particles, and clouds: a measurement and modeling study from the
Mediterranean Israeli dust experiment campaign. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos.
1984e2012, 110. Levy, I., Dayan, U., Mahrer, Y., 2008. A ﬁve-year study
of coastal recirculation and its effect on air pollutants over the East
Mediterranean region. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 1984e2012, 113. Levy, R.,
Remer, L., Mattoo, S., Vermote, E., Kaufman, Y., 2007. Second-generation
operational algorithm: retrieval of aerosol properties over land from
inversion of moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer spectral
reﬂectance. J. Geophys. Res. 112 (De13211)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2006JD007811. Long, R.W., Eatough, N.L.,
Eatough, D.J., Meyer, M.B., Wilson, W.E., 2005. Continuous determination
of ﬁne particulate matter mass in the Salt Lake City environmental
monitoring project: a comparison of real-time and conventional TEOM
monitor results. J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc. 55, 1782e1796.
http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/10473289.2005.10464776. Lyapustin, A.,
Martonchik, J., Wang, Y., Laszlo, I., Korkin, S., 2011a. Multiangle
implementation of atmospheric correction (MAIAC): 1. Radiative transfer
basis and look-up tables. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 116. Lyapustin, A.,
Wang, Y., Laszlo, I., Kahn, R., Korkin, S., Remer, L., et al., 2011b.
Multiangle implementation of atmospheric correction (MAIAC): 2. Aerosol
algorithm. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 116. MAPI, 2013. Survey of Israel
Road Dataset. Nordio, F., Kloog, I., Coull, B.A., Chudnovsky, A.,
Grillo, P., Bertazzi, P.A., et al., 2013. Estimating spatio-temporal
resolved PM10 aerosol mass concentrations using MODIS satellite data and
land use regression over Lombardy, Italy. Atmos. Environ. 74, 227e236.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2013.03.043. Oke, T.R., 1987.
Boundary Layer Climates. Psychology Press. Qgis, 2014. QGIS Geographic
Information System. Open Source Geospatial Foundation. R, 2014. R: a
Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. Remer, L.A., Kaufman, Y.J.,
Tanr, D., Mattoo, S., Chu, D.A., Martins, J.V., et al., 2005. The MODIS
aerosol algorithm, products, and validation. J. Atmos. Sci. 62, 947e973.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JAS3385.1. Rosen, R., Chu, A., Szykman, J.J.,
DeYoung, R., Al-Saadi, J., Kaduwela, A., et al., 2006. Application of
satellite data for three-dimensional monitoring of PM2.5 formation and
transport in San Joaquin Valley, California. SPIE Opt. Photonics. 6299,
629904e629904. SAS, 2013. proglangSAS/STAT Software, Version 9.1. SAS
Institute, Cary, NC. Sayer, A.M., Hsu, N.C., Bettenhausen, C., Jeong,
M.-J., 2013. Validation and uncertainty estimates for MODIS collection 6
“Deep Blue” aerosol data. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 118, 7864e7872.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50600. Sayer, A.M., Munchak, L.A., Hsu,
N.C., Levy, R.C., Bettenhausen, C., Jeong, M.-J., 2014. MODIS collection
6 aerosol products: comparison between Aqua's e-Deep Blue, dark target,
and “merged” data sets, and usage recommendations. J. Geophys. Res.
Atmos. 119, 13,965e13,989. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2014jd022453. Song,
W., Jia, H., Huang, J., Zhang, Y., 2014. A satellite-based
geographically weighted regression model for regional PM2.5 estimation
over the Pearl River delta region in China. Remote Sens. Environ. 154,
1e7. Sorek-Hamer, M., Cohen, A., Levy, R., Ziv, B., Broday, D., 2013a.
Classiﬁcation of dust days by satellite remotely sensed aerosol
products. Int. J. Remote Sens. 34, 2672e2688. Sorek-Hamer, M., Strawa,
A., Chatﬁeld, R., Esswein, R., Cohen, A., Broday, D., 2013b. Improved
retrieval of PM2.5 from satellite data products using non-linear
methods. Environ. Pollut. 182, 417e423. Sorek-Hamer, M., Kloog, I.,
Koutrakis, P., Strawa, A.W., Chatﬁeld, R., Cohen, A., Ridgway, W.L.,
Broday, D., 2015. Assessment of PM2.5 concentrations over bright
surfaces using MODIS satellite observations. Remote Sens. Environ. 163,
180e185. Strawa, A., Chatﬁeld, R., Legg, M., Scarnato, B., Esswein, R.,
2013. Improving retrievals of regional ﬁne particulate matter
concentrations from moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer
(MODIS) and ozone monitoring instrument (OMI) multisatellite
observations. J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc. 63, 1434e1446. Wood, S., 2006.
Generalized Additive Models: an Introduction with R. Chapman and
Hall/CRC. Wood, S.N., 2003. Thin-plate regression splines. J. R. Stat.
Soc. (B) 65, 95e114. Yanosky, J.D., Paciorek, C.J., Schwartz, J., Laden,
F., Puett, R., Suh, H.H., 2008. Spatiotemporal modeling of chronic PM10
exposure for the Nurses' health Study. Atmos. Environ. 42, 4047e4062.


