Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009) 55--63

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers, Environment and Urban Systems journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/compenvurbsys

Using kernel density function as an urban analysis tool: Investigating
the association between nightlight exposure and the incidence of breast
cancer in Haifa, Israel Itai Kloog a, Abraham Haim b, Boris A. Portnov
a,* a b

Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Management, University
of Haifa, Mount Carmel 31905, Haifa, Israel Department of Biology,
University of Haifa-Oranim, Kiryat Tivon, 36006, Israel

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history: Received 18 March 2008 Received in revised form 9
August 2008 Accepted 15 September 2008

Keywords: Kernel density function Light-at-night Breast cancer GIS

a b s t r a c t The kernel density (KD) function estimates the intensity
of events across a surface by calculating the overall number of cases
situated within a given search radius from a target point. To form a
continuous surface from individual observations, the KD technique does
not require the presence of a parameter's value in a given location
(e.g., the incidence rate of a disease). This feature of KD smoothing is
especially beneﬁcial for empirical studies in which individual
observations are represented by geographic coordinates only and have no
other attributes, required by more commonly used smoothing techniques,
such as spline and kriging. In the present study, we illustrate the use
of KD technique for a study of association between the geographical
distributions of breast cancer cases and exposure to artiﬁcial
illumination during nighttime (light-at-night or LAN) in the city of
Haifa, Israel. Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction According to recent epidemiological literature,
   excessive exposure to artiﬁcial illumination during nighttime
   (light-at-night or LAN) increases the risk of hormonal cancers
   (Davis, Mirick, & Stevens, 2001; Kerenyi, Pandula, & Feuer, 1990;
   Kliukiene, Tynes, & Andersen, 2001; Pauley, 2004; Schernhammer et
   al., 2001; Stevens, 1987, 2005; Verkasalo, Pukkala, Stevens, Ojamo, &
   Rudanko, 1999). The mechanism of this relationship is believed to be
   as follows: The secretion of the melatonin (MLT) hormone, which has
   strong inhibiting (oncostatic) effects on cancer cells, occurs mainly
   during nighttime (Blask et al., 2005). The exposure to LAN changes
   the natural photoperiod regime and thus reduces MLT secretion (Lewy,
   Wehr, Goodwin, Newsome, & Markey, 1980). The reduced MLT secretion
   weakens the human immune system and thus elevates the risk of
   developing malignant diseases, such as breast and prostate cancers
   (Stevens, 2005). However, studies on health-related effects of LAN
   carried out to date are yet largely fragmented and have been focused
   mainly on laboratory research and surveys of nightshift workers
   (Blask, Lemus-Wilson, & Wilson, 1992; Davis & Mirick, 2006; Davis et
   al., 2001; Haim, Shanas, & Gilboa, 2002; Hansen, 2001; Schernhammer,
   Kroenke, Laden, & Hankinson, 2006; Schernhammer et al.,

-  Corresponding author. E-mail address: portnov@nrem.haifa.ac.il (B.A.
   Portnov). 0198-9715/$ - see front matter Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All
   rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2008.09.006

2001). These studies deal with relatively small populations and thus
lack generality (Pekkanen & Pearce, 2001). The present paper attempts to
investigate the association between the geographical distributions of
breast cancer cases and nightlight exposure in the city of Haifa,
Israel, using the spatial analysis technique known as ‘kernel density'
(KD) function or ‘kernel smoothing' (McCoy & Johnston, 2001). A key
feature of kernel smoothing is that it makes it possible to use point
data that have only x, y coordinates and no other attributes (e.g.,
disease prevalence rates), required by more commonly used smoothing
techniques, such as spline and kriging. This feature of KD smoothing is
especially beneﬁcial for empirical studies, in which observations are
represented by two-dimensional points featuring home addresses of
individual patients. Although the use of KD smoothing is not novel in
empirical studies, its use has been mostly limited to visualization
tasks, such as disease mapping and the detection of disease clusters
(Berke, 2005; Hu, Liebens, & Rao, 2008; Rushton, Peleg, Banerjee, Smith,
& West, 2004). The main objective of the present study is to illustrate
the use of the KD technique for a study of association between the
geographical distribution of disease cases and the spatial distribution
of a potential health risk factor, using data on the residential
locations of 1079 breast cancer patients in the city of Haifa, Israel.
The underlying assumption of the present study is as follows: Given the
above outlined linkages between LAN exposure and cancer incidence,
residents of neighborhoods, exposed to high

56

I. Kloog et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009)
55--63

LAN intensities, should exhibit, ceteris paribus, elevated rates of
hormone-dependent cancers. The rest of the paper is organized as
follows. It starts with a brief discussion of problems associated with
the empirical analysis of population health data, such as ecological
bias and information loss due to aggregation. In the following section,
the technique of kernel smoothing is introduced and its use in empirical
studies is discussed. The KD technique is then used to investigate the
relationship between the geographic distribution of breast cancer
patients living in the city of Haifa and their LAN exposure estimates.
Different technical aspects of KD analysis are discussed and
recommendations for future research are formulated.

2. The problem of ecological bias in health-related studies A major
   problem faced by most epidemiological studies is that they rely on
   aggregated data and frequently make use of coarse geographical units,
   deﬁned for purposes other than health investigations (Elliott,
   Cuzick, English, & Stern, 1992; Elliott & Wartenberg, 2004; Nuckols,
   Ward, & Jarup, 2004). The assumption behind this ‘aggregate' approach
   is that the estimated average exposure in a particular region may
   serve as a reasonable surrogate for the actual exposure of
   individuals. This assumption can lead to an assessment error known as
   the ‘ecological fallacy' or ‘ecological bias' (Elliott et al., 1992;
   Greenland & Morgenstern, 1989; Portnov, Dubnov, & Barchana, 2007;
   Selvin, 1958). Since individual exposure levels cannot accurately be
   inferred from aggregated data, such an approach may lead to
   insensitive estimates of individual exposure as a result (Elliott &
   Wartenberg, 2004; Elliott et al., 1992; Greenland & Morgenstern,
   1989; Nuckols et al., 2004; Rothman, 1993). In addition, even when
   individual-level health data are accessible, there is a difﬁculty to
   match them with socio-economic variables which are usually aggregated
   into census-designated statistical areas, and are rarely available
   for individuals (Elliott & Wartenberg, 2004; Elliott et al., 1992;
   Nuckols et al., 2004). Ecological bias due to aggregation (commonly
   referred to as the information loss due to areal aggregation) may
   distort the effect estimates (Gotway & Young, 2002; Greenland &
   Morgenstern, 1989), adding to other sources of ecological errors such
   as ‘confounding' and ‘effect modiﬁcation' (Greenland & Morgenstern,
   1989; Morgenstern & Thomas, 1993). The problem of information loss
   due to data aggregation is especially acute when observations are
   represented by simple point data (Gelfand, Zhu, & Carlin, 2001). If
   these ‘raw' data are aggregated into geographic units of different
   shape and size, different conclusions which may be drawn for
   different levels of aggregation are known as the modiﬁable areal unit
   problem or MAUP (Gehlke & Biehl, 1934; Openshaw, 1984; Openshaw &
   Taylor, 1979). In fact, the MAUP implies two separate, but
   interrelated issues pertinent to spatial data analysis. The ﬁrst one
   is the ‘scale problem', where the same set of areal data is
   aggregated into several sets of larger areal units, with each
   combination leading to different inferences. This problem is also
   known as the change of units of support problem or CUSP. This problem
   is concerned with inferences about the values of the variable at
   points or areal blocks being different from those at which they were
   originally observed (Gelfand et al., 2001). The second aspect of the
   MAUP is the ‘zoning problem', which occurs if a given set of areal
   units is recombined into zones that are of the same size but located
   differently, thus resulting in the variation of data values and,
   consequently, different conclusions about the directions and strength
   of relationship between research variables (Openshaw & Taylor, 1979).
   In the present study, we attempt to ‘bypass' the information-loss
   problems by using the technique of KD smoothing, which helps to

preserve the original number of observations without a need either to
aggregate or average them (McCoy & Johnston, 2001). 3. The use of KD
estimates in empirical studies Kernel density (KD) estimation is a data
smoothing technique which transforms a sample of observations, recorded
as geographically referenced point data, into a continuous surface,
indicating the intensity of individual observation over space (Bailey &
Gatrell, 1995). Points lying near the center of a search area are
weighted more heavily than those lying near the edge (McCoy & Johnston,
2001). The kernel weights events within its ‘sphere of inﬂuence'
according to their distance from the point at which the intensity being
estimated (Gatrell, Bailey, Diggle, & Rowlingson, 1996). The general
form of the KD function is as follows:

\^kðsÞ ¼

  n X 1 ðs  si Þ ; k 2 i¼1

s

s

where \^ kðsÞ is the estimate of the intensity of the spatial point
pattern measurement at location s; si is the observed ith event, k
represents the kernel weighting function and s is the bandwidth (Borruso
& Schoier, 2004). When applied to a study of point patterns, KD
smoothing provides considerable advantages compared to other techniques,
such as simple mapping of point patterns or ‘quadrat count' analysis. In
particular, it makes it possible to estimate the intensity of a point
pattern and to represent it by means of a smoothed continuous surface,
thus helping to highlight the presence of clusters or regularities in
the parameter's distribution (Gatrell et al., 1996). The KD technique
has been used in several empirical studies. Thus, Portnov, Dubnov, and
Barchana (2008) used this technique to investigate the relationship
between SO2 pollution and lung cancer incidence. The results obtained by
KD smoothing were contrasted with the results obtained by areal
aggregation techniques. The analysis showed that the areal density of
lung cancer patients in the study area appeared to increase by some
0.45% for each percent rise in air pollution levels. This result was in
disagreement with the results of previous studies which were based on
relatively large geographical units (i.e., towns and small statistical
areas) and assigned average exposure levels to all individuals residing
in each unit. As argued, exposure metrics based on KD estimates are more
sensitive to individual exposure levels than zonal approaches used in
previous investigations. Hu et al. (2008) examined the association
between stroke mortality, air pollution, income and access to open areas
in northwest Florida. The researchers used air pollution density
surfaces, which were calculated from point source polluters located in
the counties neighboring the study area, to derive surrogate air
pollution exposures. In addition, a kernel density surface was
calculated using the trafﬁc count data with a smooth, curved surface
ﬁtted over each road segment. Using the kernel density maps, the
researchers found that the high risk of stroke mortality appeared to be
higher in low income neighborhoods, and in neighborhoods with high air
pollution levels and insufﬁcient green space. Rushton et al. (2004) used
spatial analysis tools to identify areas with high rates of late-stage
colorectal cancer. The rates were calculated using kernel density maps.
The spatial smoothing of individual-level data was performed using the
‘sliding window' method. As the researchers concluded, the spatial
smoothing produced more accurate estimates than the rates computed from
small census area data. Berke (2005) used the exploratory relative risk
mapping for identifying unknown spatially varying risk factors. The risk
mapping was performed using both the KD smoothing and by kriging the
Bayesian smoothed regional risks from tract count data.

I. Kloog et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009)
55--63

57

Fig. 1. Location of homes of breast cancer patients in the city of Haifa
juxtaposed over LAN intensity map.

4. Research method 4.1. Haifa as a case study The City of Haifa, which
   forms the study area, is located in the northern part of Israel and
   hosts about 260,000 residents, of whom around 1100 persons were
   diagnosed with breast cancer (BC) in 1998--2001. The average latency
   period of BC is estimated as 10-- 15 years prior to the diagnosis
   date (Ozonoff et al., 2005). Therefore, only the patients who lived
   in the study area for at least 10 years prior to the diagnosis (1079
   patients) were included in the analysis. The data on BC morbidity
   were obtained from the Israel National Cancer Registry (INCR, 2004),
   the population-based national cancer registry established in 1960 and
   covering the entire country. Since 1982, reporting to the registry
   has been mandatory for all medical facilities (i.e., medical
   institutions and pathology laboratories, both public and private). In
   accordance with the law, INCR retrieves each cancer patient personal
   data from the central population registry, including the place of
   birth, immigration date, current and historical place of residence
   (street address including house number), ethnicity and gender (INCR,
   2004). The locations of homes of individual BC patients were mapped
   using the ArcGIS 9TM software. 4.2. LAN data The data on the
   nighttime illumination in the city neighborhoods were obtained from
   the municipality of Haifa's engineering department. The database
   contained the location and light

power (W) of all existing light posts, located within the city's limits
(approximately 9000 entries). Using the Spatial Analyst module of the
ArcGIS 9TM (Minami & ESRI, 2000), we transformed these data into a
continuous KD surface, reﬂecting the intensity of outdoor nighttime
illumination in the entire study area (see Fig. 1).1 4.3. Exposure
classiﬁcation In the ﬁrst phase of the analysis, the KD surface of BC
patients was calculated using the ArcGISTM Spatial Analyst module (McCoy
& Johnston, 2001).2 The calculation was based on the layer of homes of
individual breast cancer patients (see small black dots in Fig. 1) and
resulted in obtaining a continuous surface, which individual cells (50 
50 m) represent the estimated number of BC patients per km2 of
surrounding area, i.e., the density of cancer patients whose homes are
located within a predeﬁned 500-m search radius around each cell (Fig. 2)
(see Section 4.4 for more details).

1 Outdoor nighttime illumination is only one source of potential LAN
exposure. Other sources include indoor illumination and LAN exposure in
enclosed public spaces and at work place. The addition of these
potential confounders requires individual-level surveys, based on a
representative sample of BC patients and control population groups.
However, such surveys are beyond the scope of the present study, which
is based on population-level data. This limitation of the study is
further discussed in Section 6. 2 Although there are other software
solutions for performing KD analysis, such as e.g., CrimeStat (Levine,
2007) and SatScan (Kulldorff, 2007), the spatial analyst module of the
ArcGIS9TM software was found to be sufﬁcient for our speciﬁc needs.

58

I. Kloog et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009)
55--63

Fig. 2. Kernel density of breast cancer patients (the average number of
breast cancer patients per km2).

By overlapping this surface with the location of homes of individual
patients (see Fig. 1), the values of BC patients' density were estimated
for all locations in which individual BC patients reside (around 1100
locations). To this end, the ‘spatial join' tool of ArcGISTM was used
(Minami & ESRI, 2000). In a similar manner the outdoor LAN intensity was
calculated for BC patients' home locations, by obtaining LAN values for
BC patients' home locations from the kernel surface of LAN (see Section
4.2 on LAN data).

search radius (i.e., 500, 750 and 1000 m) were introduced in the
multivariate analysis consequently, with the 500-m radius kernel
providing the highest R2 and generality (measured by the model's
F-statistic). For brevity's sake, in the following discussion, only the
results for the best performing search radius (i.e., 500 m) are
reported.

4.4. Kernel density calculation

Descriptive statistics of the research variables are presented in
Appendix 1. These variables include: light intensity (W per km2);
elevation above the sea level (m); SO2 pollution (lg/m3, annual
average); building density (buildings per km2); residential density
(ground ﬂoor area in m2 of ﬂoor area per km2 of ground area), and
population density (residents per km2). The density of BC cancer
patients around a point of space may be high simply because the area is
densely populated. To account for population density patterns, the data
on the residential location of each person living in the study area
(both BC patients and all other residents of the study area) are
required. However, only building layers and aggregate population
estimates for small census areas were available for the analysis.
Therefore, we used three different approaches for estimating residential
density patterns. First, we used the geographic layer of residential
buildings and calculated their kernel density (that is, the number of
buildings per km2). Although the use of buildings' centroids for the
construction of residential density surface is the simplest and most
straightforward solution, it has a serious drawback. In particular this
method

The size of bandwidth chosen for the KD estimation determines the degree
of smoothing produced. It is often useful to examine several density
plots of the same samples, all smoothed by different amounts, in order
to gain greater insight into the data (Farewell, 1999). There are
varying guidelines for choosing a KD bandwidth, apart from visual
inspection. Some researchers have argued that the bandwidth must not
exceed the ﬁnest resolution desired, while others prefer to base the KD
bandwidth upon nearest neighbor distances (Levine, 2007). Some
researchers have argued for a particular size of the kernel bandwidth,
which would produce a smoother kernel (Farewell 1999) or a more rough
kernel (Silverman, 1986). Yet there appears to be no consensus as to how
the bandwidth size should be chosen (Levine, 2007). In the present
analysis we decided that the KD bandwidth should not be smaller than two
average housing blocks, that is, 500 m. Two additional search radii
(with one block increment) -- 750 and 1000 m -- were also tested in the
analysis. Due to a multicollinearity concern, the KD estimates obtained
for each

4.5. Control variables

I. Kloog et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009)
55--63

does not differentiate between buildings of different sizes, such as,
e.g., small single-family houses vs. large multi-family structures. As a
result, it overestimates population densities for neighborhoods with
small detached houses and underestimates them for neighborhoods with
large residential complexes (i.e., multi-family houses). At least in
part, this problem can be corrected by taking into account the ﬂoor area
of individual residential structures. Therefore, as the second
alternative, we constructed the KD surface by adjusting the location of
individual buildings by each building's ground ﬂoor area (m2). However,
such an approach provides only a partial solution, because it does not
take into account either the differences in the number of ﬂoors in
individual buildings or the number of residents per unit of ﬂoor area
(that is, housing density). Therefore, as the third alternative we
constructed a continuous surface of population density using data on
average residential densities (i.e., number of persons per km2)
available for individual city neighborhoods. Although this approach may
hide ﬁne intraneighborhood variations of population density patterns, it
may nevertheless be more accurate than the previous two, which make sole
use of building size and location and do not take into account either
number of ﬂoors or number of residents in each house.

59

The epidemiological literature is rather inconclusive as to whether air
pollution has an effect on BC incidence (Brody et al., 2007). However,
in order not to rule out from the outset that such a possibility may
exist, we used SO2 air pollution estimates at the locations of BC
patients' homes as an additional explanatory variable. Air pollution
data were obtained from 20 air quality monitoring stations that measure
and report halfhour mean concentration levels of SO2 in the study area.
These data were interpolated into a continuous surface of SO2 air
pollution estimates using the inverse distance weighted (IDW)
interpolation method and then individual SO2 estimates were calculated
for the locations of homes of BC patients, by ‘joining' the surface of
SO2 pollution with the locations of homes of BC patients. As in the
previous phases of the analysis, the ‘spatial join' tool of ArcGISTM
software was used to this end (Minami & ESRI, 2000). An additional
explanatory variable used in the analysis was the elevation of homes of
BC patients above the sea level. The elevation variable is of particular
importance in the local context. High elevation provides better views of
open spaces, sea and of other landscape features. Therefore, in Haifa,
high elevations of dwellings above the sea level are closely associated
with more expensive housing and, generally, with a high socio-economic
status of local residents (Portnov et al., 2006). In the absence of
welfare data on

Fig. 3. Local Moran's I values showing signiﬁcant clustering of the
residuals.

60

I. Kloog et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009)
55--63

individual BC patients, this variable was used as a proxy for their
welfare levels. 4.6. Statistical analysis To identify and measure the
signiﬁcance of factors inﬂuencing the density of BC patients in the
study area, several multivariate statistical techniques were used.
First, we started with the following OLS model:

lnðBCÞ ¼ b0 þ

4 X

bi F i þ e;

i¼1

where BC is the kernel density of BC patients in a given location; b0,
bi are regression coefﬁcients; Fi are the explanatory variables, and e
is a random error term. Although during the analysis, other functional
forms (that is double-linear and double-log models) were also tested,
the above log-linear model was found to be best performing. During the
analysis multicollinearity and normality were tested and their results
were found satisfactory. The residuals from the OLS model were tested by
two tests: cluster and outlier analysis (Local Moran's I), and Moran's I
global autocollinearity test (Anselin, 1999). The local Moran's I test
showed signiﬁcant clustering of the residuals (see Fig. 3), while the
global Moran's I indicated that autocollinearity of residuals was highly
signiﬁcant (I = 0.14; Z = 32.43, P < 0.001). These results necessitated
the use of spatial lag (SL) models in order to improve the robustness of
regression estimates. The SL models were performed using the
SPlus-SpatialStatsTM software.

5. Results Table 1 shows the factors affecting the areal density of BC
   patients. The ﬁrst three models are OLS models, which differ by a way
   in which the density variable is calculated -- number of resi-

dential buildings per km2 (Model 1), ﬂoor area of buildings per km2
(Model 2) or density of residents per km2 (Model 3). The other three
models are spatial lag (SL) models estimated respectively by three
different methods -- conditional auto-regression (Model 4), simultaneous
auto-regression (Model 5) and moving average (Model 6). (In all three SL
models, the density variable is represented by density of residents,
which appears to be best performing). The models appear to provide a
reasonably good ﬁt (R2 = 0.609-- 0.701) and high degree of generality (F
= 413.889--623.802, P < 0.01). In all models, LAN variable appears to be
positively associated with kernel density of BC patients (P < 0.01).
Concurrently, the BC density is negatively associated with ‘elevation'
(P < 0.01), implying that the density of BC patients, appears to be
lower in higher income neighborhoods. In four out of six models
(excluding Models 1 and 2), the density of BC patients is positively
associated with housing/population density (t > 9.0; P < 0.001). The SO2
variable appears to be statistically signiﬁcant at a 0.05 signiﬁcance
level in three (out of six) models (Models 1, 2 and 5 P < 0.05) and is
statistically insigniﬁcant in the rest (Models 3--4 and 6).
Characteristically, among all six models tested in the ﬁrst run of the
analysis, the two types of SL modes (simultaneous auto-regression and
moving average) appear to provide the best ﬁt, as indicated by
relatively small standard errors of the estimate (SEE = 0.237 (Model 5)
vs. SEE = 0.316 (Model 3)). Although in the analysis, the
multicollinearity of research variables was tested and found within
tolerable limits (Tol. > 0.4), even this relatively low level of
multicollinearity may bias regression estimates. Therefore, we used the
stepwise multiple regression (SMR) method, to include only statistically
signiﬁcant variables in the resulting model (see Table 2; Model 7). As
this model shows, three variables -- LAN, elevation and density --
emerged as statistically signiﬁcant. All of them exhibit expected signs.
In particular, the density of BC patients increases with LAN intensity
(b = 1.506; t = 14.8; P < 0.001), population density (b = 0.058; t =
18.1; P < 0.001) and drop with elevation of houses

Table 1 Factors affecting the areal density of breast cancer patients.
Methods: ordinary least squares -- OLS (Models 1--3) and spatial lag
(SL) regression.f Variable

Model 1

Light intensity (LAN) S02 Elevation Density (Constant) Number of obs. R2
R2 adjusted F SEEd Rhoe

c

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Tolerance

Ba

tb

Ba

tb

Ba

tb

Ba

tb

Ba

tb

Ba

tb

2.996 0.021 1.433 0.234 3.049

33.653** 2.042* 12.773* 5.434* 39.162**

2.582 0.052 1.149 0.452 2.726

23.732* 4.875* 9.958* 1.832 34.348*

1.439 0.006 0.314 0.059 2.834

14.962* 0.636 2.955* 18.235* 49.926*

1.439 0.005 0.313 0.058 2.833

14.961* 0.636 2.954* 18.235* 49.925*

1.764 0.039 0.342 0.047 2.944

18.952* 2.894* 2.636* 14.652* 33.411**

1.619 0.005 0.627 0.019 3.011

16.267* 0.340 4.422* 9.379* 30.941*

1079 0.619 0.617 430.582** 0.358 --

1079 0.609 0.608 413.889** 0.362 --

1079 0.701 0.700 623.802** 0.316 --

1079 -- -- -- 0.316 0.000

1079 -- -- -- 0.237 0.022

Model 1: OLS; density measure -- number of residential buildings per
km2. Model 2: OLS; density measure -- ground ﬂoor area of residential
buildings in m2. Model 3: OLS; density measure -- number of residents
per km2. Model 4: Spatial lag (SL) model; covariance type -- conditional
auto-regression (CAR); density measure -- number of residents per km2.
Model 5: Spatial lag (SL) model; covariance type -- simultaneous
auto-regression (SAR); density measure -- number of residents per km2.
Model 6: Spatial lag (SL) model; covariance type -- moving average (MA);
density measure -- number of residents per km2. a Regression coefﬁcient.
b t-statistic. c Number of valid observations list-wise. d Standard
error of the estimate. e Spatial lag coefﬁcient. f Original values of
the dependent variable are logarithmically transformed as follows:
BC\_density = LN(BC\_density). * 0.05 signiﬁcance level. ** 0.01
signiﬁcance level.

1079 -- -- -- 0.241 0.060

0.436 0.853 0.783 0.357 --

61

I. Kloog et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009)
55--63 Table 2 Alternative models of the factors affecting the kernel
density of Breast cancer patients. Variable

Model 7 a

B LAN S02 Elevation Density Neighborhood dummied (79) (Constant) Number
of obs.c R2 R2 adjusted F

1.506 -- 0.290 0.058 --

Model 8 t

b

2

R change **

14.825 -- 2.613* 18.060* --

**

0.065 -- 0.002* 0.616* -- 1079

0.683 0.682 770.482**

Tolerance

Ba

tb

0.438 -- 0.792 0.393 --

0.005 0.077 0.003 --

8.405** 0.938 2.053* --

3.654

6.948* 1079 0.534 0.496 14.100*

Model 7: Method -- stepwise regression; original values of the dependent
variable are logarithmically transformed as follows: BC = LN(BC), where
kernel density of BC patients (per km2). Model 8: Method -- OLS; density
measure -- number of residents per km2; values of the dependent variable
are calculated as follows: BC\_density = LN(BC  103 /P\_density), where
BC\_density = the relative density of BC patients; BC = kernel density
of BC patients (per km2), and P\_density = number of residents per km2.
a Regression coefﬁcient. b t-statistic. c Number of valid observations
list-wise. * 0.05 signiﬁcance level. ** 0.01 signiﬁcance level.

(b = 0.259; t = 2.613; P < 0.01). In this model, the relative
contribution of individual predictors can be estimated by the R2 change.
Thus, the ‘density' variable contributes most to explaining the variance
of the dependent variable (R2-change = 0.616), followed by LAN
(R2-change = 0.065) and ‘elevation' (R2-change = 0.002). An alternative
way of representing BC incidence in a given point of space is to divide
the density of BC patients by the overall density of population in the
same location. The resulting measure is essentially similar to the
disease incidence rate commonly used in empirical epidemiological
studies, in which the incidence rate of a disease is calculated by
dividing the number of people affected by the total number of people at
risk (Bray, McCarron, & Parkin, 2004; Parkin, Bray, & Devesa, 2001;
Parkin, Bray, Ferlay, & Pisani, 2001). The measure calculated in such a
way was used in the regression rerun (Model 8; Table 2). We also added
neighborhood ‘dummies' to this model, i.e., dichotomous variables, which
take on value 1, if a person resides in a given residential neighborhood
and 0 otherwise (for the sake of brevity, regression estimates for
individual neighborhoods' dummies are not reported in the following
analysis). As in previous regression runs, the LAN variable emerged as
positively associated with BC rates (t = 8.405; P < 0.01), so did
elevation (t = 2.053; P < 0.01), while the SO2 variable was found
statistically insigniﬁcant (P > 0.5).

6. Conclusion In empirical urban research, individual observations are
   often represented by simple point data, which lack any other
   attributes, except for geographic coordinates. To estimate the
   prevalence rate of such events, the researcher needs to normalize the
   overall number of cases recorded in a chosen territorial unit (e.g.,
   statistical area or air pollution zone) by its overall population.
   Although, technically, this task is relatively simple, such areal
   aggregation of data is likely to lead to a potential loss of
   information and a possibility of erroneous estimates it entails
   (Elliott & Wartenberg 2004; Elliott et al., 1992; Greenland &
   Morgenstern, 1989; Nuckols et al., 2004). In the present study, we
   attempt to address this informationloss problem by using the
   analytical technique known as the

‘kernel smoothing' or ‘kernel density' (KD) function (Bailey & Gatrell,
1995; Borruso & Schoier, 2004; Gatrell et al., 1996; McCoy & Johnston,
2001). The KD technique does not require the presence of a parameter's
value in a given location (e.g., prevalence rate), which is essential
for more common smoothing techniques, such as spline and kriging.
Although the use of KD smoothing is not novel in empirical studies, its
use has been mostly limited to visualization tasks, such as disease
mapping and the detection of disease clusters (Berke, 2005; Hu et al.,
2008; Rushton et al., 2004). However, as the present study demonstrates,
the application of this analytical technique may surpass this simple
visualization-oriented use and thus become a useful analytical tool for
environmental epidemiological research, looking into possible
associations between environmental risk factors and their health
outcomes. To illustrate this possible use of KD estimates, the present
study looked into the association between the geographical distributions
of breast cancer (BC) cases and nightlight exposure in the city of
Haifa, Israel, using a variety of statistical tools ranging from
ordinary least squares (OLS) to spatial lag (SL) regressions. As the
study shows, the breast cancer incidence and LAN appear to be
signiﬁcantly associated (P < 0.01), controlled for population densities,
SO2 air pollution and indicator of local welfare levels. The link
between LAN exposure and breast cancer rates found in this study thus
adds further evidence to previous studies concerning the relation
between LAN and breast cancer (Anisimov, 2006; Kloog, Haim, Stevens,
Barchana, & Portnov, 2008; Pauley, 2004; Stevens et al., 2007; Verkasalo
et al., 1999) and provides additional evidence of coherence (for an
inference of causality), as described by Hill (1965). The proposed
technique of analysis is relatively simple. In the ﬁrst step, point
locations (i.e., home addresses of individual patients) are transformed
into a continuous KD surface. Next, KD values are calculated for the
location of individual patients' homes, using the ‘spatial join' tool of
GIS software. The values obtained thereby are then used as the dependent
variable in a multivariate analysis. In a similar manner, the values of
predictors are estimated (e.g., population densities, air pollution,
etc.). That is, continuous KD surfaces are formed for each of these
factors, and, then, the factors' values are estimated for the home
locations of individual

62

I. Kloog et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009)
55--63

patients. By way of this procedure, the initial number of observations
remains unchanged, whereas zonal technique, more commonly used in
empirical studies, reduce the number of observations dramatically by
summing up individual observations for predeﬁned areal units (such as
statistical areas or census zones). To the best of our knowledge, the
present analysis is the ﬁrst study which investigates the relationship
between LAN exposure and BC incidence within urban areas, whereas most
previous studies were limited to laboratory research and surveys of
nightshift workers (Blask et al., 1992; Davis & Mirick, 2006; Davis et
al., 2001; Haim et al., 2002; Hansen, 2001; Schernhammer et al., 2001,
2006). It is to be noted, however, that the study has several
limitations associated with its population-level design. In particular,
it carries no information on potential confounders, such as ethnicity,
smoking habits, diet and alcohol consumption. The addition of these
potential confounders requires individual-level surveys, based on a
representative sample of BC patients and control population groups,
which may form the main thrust of follow-up studies. In addition, it
should be noted that outdoor illumination is only one source of
potential nighttime LAN exposure. Other sources include indoor
illumination and LAN exposure in enclosed public spaces, public
transportation and LAN exposure at work place. At least in part, this
problem is countered here by the fact that most women are at home during
night, since the proportional share of nighttime workers is relatively
small, not surpassing 8--16%, by different estimates (McOrmond, 2004;
USCB, 2006). Moreover, in Israel, especially during long and hot
summers, most people sleep with open windows and curtains, so as to
improve cross-ventilation, thus increasing their exposure to outdoor
LAN. There are various studies showing that even low or short exposure
to LAN can decrease MLT production drastically (Pauley, 2004). Finally,
we suggest that the proposed technique may be applicable to a wide range
of empirical studies in which individual observations are represented by
simple point data (such as trafﬁc accidents, crime occurrences and ﬁres)
and may be considered as an alternative to zonal approaches based on
data aggregation and calculation rates, which lead to a reduction in the
number of observation points, thus elevating the probability of
ecological bias. Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to Dr. Micha
Barchana, Head of the Israel National Cancer Registry, for providing
breast cancer data.

Our gratitude is also due to three anonymous reviewers for their
numerous helpful remarks and suggestions. References Anisimov, V. N.
(2006). Light pollution, reproductive function and cancer risk.
Neuroendocrinology Letters, 27(1--2), 35--52. Anselin, L. (1999).
Spatial econometrics. Dallas: Bruton Center School of Social Sciences,
University of Texas. Bailey, T. C., & Gatrell, A. C. (1995). Interactive
spatial data analysis. London: Longman. Berke, O. (2005). Exploratory
spatial relative risk mapping. Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 71(3--4),
173--182. Blask, D. E., Brainard, G. C., Dauchy, R. T., Haniﬁn, J. P.,
Davidson, L. K., Krause, J. A., et al. (2005). Melatonin-depleted blood
from premenopausal women exposed to light at night stimulates growth of
human breast cancer xenografts in nude rats. Cancer Research, 65(23),
11174--11184. Blask, D. E., Lemus-Wilson, A. M., & Wilson, S. T. (1992).
Breast cancer: A model system for studying the neuroendocrine role of
pineal melatonin in oncology. Biochemical Society Transactions, 20(2),
309--311. Borruso, G., & Schoier, G. (2004). Density analysis on large
geographical databases. Search for an index of centrality of services at
urban scale. In Computational Science and Its Applications -- ICCSA 2004
(Vol. 3044/2004). Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer. Bray, F., McCarron, P., &
Parkin, D. M. (2004). The changing global patterns of female breast
cancer incidence and mortality. Breast Cancer Research, 6(6), 229--239.
Brody, J. G., Moysich, K. B., Humblet, O., Attﬁeld, K. R., Beehler, G.
P., & Rudel, R. A. (2007). Environmental pollutants and breast cancer:
Epidemiologic studies. Cancer, 109(S12), 2667--2711. Davis, S., &
Mirick, D. K. (2006). Circadian disruption, shift work and the risk of
cancer: a summary of the evidence and studies in Seattle. Cancer Causes
Control, 17(4), 539--545. Davis, S., Mirick, D. K., & Stevens, R. G.
(2001). Night shift work, light at night, and risk of breast cancer.
Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 93(20), 1557--1562. Elliott,
P., Cuzick, J., English, D., & Stern, R. (1992). Geographical and
environmental epidemiology. Methods for small area studies. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. Elliott, P., & Wartenberg, D. (2004). Spatial
epidemiology: Current approaches and future challenges. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 12(9), 998--1006. Farewell, D. (1999). Specifying
the bandwidth function for the kernel density estimator. Available from:
<http://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/bugs/ documentation/coda03/node44.html>.
Gatrell, A. C., Bailey, T. C., Diggle, P. J., & Rowlingson, B. S.
(1996). Spatial point pattern analysis and its application in
geographical epidemiology. Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers, 21(1), 256--274. Gehlke, C., & Biehl, K. (1934). Certain
effects of grouping upon the size of the correlation coefﬁcient in
census tract material. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
(29), 169--170. Gelfand, A., Zhu, L., & Carlin, B. P. (2001). On the
change of support problem for spatio-temporal data. Biostatistics, 2,
31--45. Gotway, C., & Young, L. J. (2002). Combining incompatible
spatial data. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(48),
632--647. Greenland, S., & Morgenstern, H. (1989). Ecological bias,
confounding, and effect modiﬁcation. International Journal of
Epidemiology, 18(1), 269--274. Haim, A., Shanas, U., & Gilboa, A.
(2002). Responses to photoperiod manipulations of social voles (Microtus
Socialis): Food and energy consumption. Israel Journal of Zoology, 48,
170--171. Hansen, J. (2001). Increased breast cancer risk among women
who work predominantly at night. Epidemiology, 12(1), 74--77.

Appendix 1 Descriptive statistics of the research variables.a Variable

Unit

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Std. deviation

Dependent variables Areal density of breast cancer cases Relative
density of BC patients

Patients per km2 Patients per km2/residents per km2

3.00 1.79

147.00 6.52

52.91 3.91

32.06 0.39

Explanatory variables Light intensity Elevation above the sea level SO2
pollution Building density Residential density Population density

W per km2 m lg/m3 (annual average) Buildings per km2 Ground ﬂoor area
(m2) of buildings per km2 Residents per km2

0 5 4 0 0 500

768 425 10 1940 34,0000 28500

321.47 133.54 6.50 649.19 148574.61 10042.63

153.29 104.19 1.17 326.30 68290.19 5056.04

a

Total number of cases -- 1079.

I. Kloog et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 33 (2009)
55--63 Hill, A. B. (1965). The environment and disease: Association or
causation? Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 58, 295--300.
Hu, Z., Liebens, J., & Rao, K. R. (2008). Linking stroke mortality with
air pollution, income, and greenness in northwest Florida: An ecological
geographical study. International Journal of Health Geographics, 7, 20.
INCR (2004). Geographical mapping of breast cancer in Israel:
1984--1999. <http:// www.health.gov.il> Accessed 2004. Kerenyi, N. A.,
Pandula, E., & Feuer, G. (1990). Why the incidence of cancer is
increasing: The role of ‘light pollution'. Medical Hypotheses, 33(2),
75--78. Kliukiene, J., Tynes, T., & Andersen, A. (2001). Risk of breast
cancer among Norwegian women with visual impairment. British Journal of
Cancer, 84(3), 397--399. Kloog, I., Haim, A., Stevens, R. G., Barchana,
M., & Portnov, B. A. (2008). Light at night co-distributes with incident
breast but not lung cancer in the female population of Israel.
Chronobiology International, 25(1), 65--81. Kulldorff, M. (2007).
Satstan 7.0.3. [[http://www.satscan.org/]] Retrieved, Accessed 2007.
Levine, N. (2007). CrimeStat: A spatial statistics program for the
analysis of crime incident locations. Washington, DC: National Institute
of Justice. Lewy, A. J., Wehr, T. A., Goodwin, F. K., Newsome, D. A., &
Markey, S. P. (1980). Light suppresses melatonin secretion in humans.
Science, 210(4475), 1267--1269. McCoy, J., & Johnston, K. (2001). Using
ArcGIS Spatial Analyst. Redlands: ESRI. McOrmond, T. (2004). Changes in
working trends over the past decade. Labour Market Trends. Minami, M., &
ESRI (2000). Using ArcMap: GIS. Redlands California: ESRI. Morgenstern,
H., & Thomas, D. (1993). Principles of study design in environmental
epidemiology. Environmental Health Perspectives, 101(Suppl. 4), 23--38.
Nuckols, J. R., Ward, M. H., & Jarup, L. (2004). Using geographic
information systems for exposure assessment in environmental
epidemiology studies. Environmental Health Perspectives, 112(9),
1007--1015. Openshaw, S. (1984). The modiﬁable areal unit problem.
Norwich: GeoBooks. Openshaw, S., & Taylor, P. (1979). A million or so
correlation coefﬁcients: three experiments on the modiﬁable areal unit
problem. In Statistical applications in the spatial sciences (pp.
127--144). London: Pion. Ozonoff, A., Webster, T., et al. (2005).
Cluster detection methods applied to the upper cape cod cancer data.
Environmental Health, 4, 19. Parkin, D. M., Bray, F. I., & Devesa, S. S.
(2001). Cancer burden in the year 2000. The global picture. European
Journal of Cancer, 37(Suppl. 8), S4--66. Parkin, D. M., Bray, F.,
Ferlay, J., & Pisani, P. (2001). Estimating the world cancer burden:
Globocan 2000. International Journal of Cancer, 94(2), 153--156. Pauley,
S. M. (2004). Lighting for the human circadian clock: Recent research
indicates that lighting has become a public health issue. Medical
Hypotheses, 63(4), 588--596.

63

Pekkanen, J., & Pearce, N. (2001). Environmental epidemiology:
Challenges and opportunities. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(1),
1--5. Portnov, B. A., Dubnov, J., & Barchana, M. (2007). On ecological
fallacy, assessment errors stemming from misguided variable selection,
and the effect of aggregation on the outcome of epidemiological study.
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 17(1), 106--
121. Portnov, B. A., Dubnov, J., & Barchana, M. (2008). Studying the
association between air-pollution and lung cancer incidence in a large
metropolitan area using a kernel density function. Socio-Economic
Planning Sciences, doi:10.1016/ j.seps.2008.09.001. Portnov, B. A.,
Odish, Y., et al. (2006). Factors affecting housing modiﬁcations and
housing pricing: A case study of four residential neighborhoods in
Haifa, Israel. Journal of Real Estate Research, 27(4), 371--407.
Rothman, K. J. (1993). Methodologic frontiers in environmental
epidemiology. Environmental Health Perspectives, 101(Suppl. 4), 19--21.
Rushton, G., Peleg, I., Banerjee, A., Smith, G., & West, M. (2004).
Analyzing geographic patterns of disease incidence. Rates of late-stage
colorectal cancer in Iowa. Journal of Medical Systems, 28(3), 223--236.
Schernhammer, E. S., Kroenke, C. H., Laden, F., & Hankinson, S. E.
(2006). Night work and risk of breast cancer. Epidemiology, 17(1),
108--111. Schernhammer, E. S., Laden, F., Speizer, F. E., Willett, W.
C., Hunter, D. J., Kawachi, I., et al. (2001). Rotating night shifts and
risk of breast cancer in women participating in the nurses' health
study. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 93(20), 1563--1568.
Selvin, H. C. (1958). Durkheim's ‘suicide' and problems of empirical
research. American Journal of Sociology, 63, 607--619. Silverman, B. W.
(1986). Density estimation for statistics and data analysis. New York:
Chapman and Hall. Stevens, R. G. (1987). Electric power use and breast
cancer: A hypothesis. American Journal of Epidemiology, 125(4),
556--561. Stevens, R. G. (2005). Circadian disruption and breast cancer:
From melatonin to clock genes. Epidemiology, 16(2), 254--258. Stevens,
R. G., Blask, D. E., Brainard, G. C., Hansen, J., Lockley, S. W.,
Provencio, I., et al. (2007). Meeting report: The role of environmental
lighting and circadian disruption in cancer and other diseases.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 115(9), 1357--1362. USCB (2006).
Labor force employment earnings. [[http://www.census.gov/]] Accessed
2006. Verkasalo, P. K., Pukkala, E., Stevens, R. G., Ojamo, M., &
Rudanko, S. L. (1999). Inverse association between breast cancer
incidence and degree of visual impairment in Finland. British Journal of
Cancer, 80(9), 1459-- 1460.


