ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Long- and Short-Term Exposure to PM2.5 and Mortality Using Novel
Exposure Models Itai Kloog,a Bill Ridgway,b Petros Koutrakis,a Brent A.
Coull,c and Joel D. Schwartza

Background: Many studies have reported associations between ambient
particulate matter (PM) and adverse health effects, focused on either
short-term (acute) or long-term (chronic) PM exposures. For chronic
effects, the studied cohorts have rarely been representative of the
population. We present a novel exposure model combining satellite
aerosol optical depth and land-use data to investigate both the long-
and short-term effects of PM2.5 exposures on population mortality in
Massachusetts, United States, for the years 2000--2008. Methods: All
deaths were geocoded. We performed two separate analyses: a time-series
analysis (for short-term exposure) where counts in each geographic grid
cell were regressed against cell-specific short-term PM2.5 exposure,
temperature, socioeconomic data, lung cancer rates (as a surrogate for
smoking), and a spline of time (to control for season and trends). In
addition, for long-term exposure, we performed a relative incidence
analysis using two long-term exposure metrics: regional 10 × 10 km PM2.5
predictions and local deviations from the cell average based on land use
within 50 m of the residence. We tested whether these predicted the
proportion of deaths from PM-related causes (cardiovascular and
respiratory diseases). Results: For short-term exposure, we found that
for every 10-µg/m3 increase in PM 2.5 exposure there was a 2.8% increase
in PM-related mortality (95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.0--3.5). For
the long-term exposure at the grid cell level, we found an odds ratio
(OR) for every 10-µg/m3 increase in long-term PM2.5 exposure of 1.6 (CI
= 1.5--1.8) for particle-related diseases. Local PM2.5 had an OR of 1.4
(CI = 1.3-- 1.5), which was independent of and additive to the grid cell
effect. Conclusions: We have developed a novel PM2.5 exposure model
based on remote sensing data to assess both short- and long-term human
exposures. Our approach allows us to gain spatial resolution in acute
effects and an assessment of long-term effects in the entire population
rather than a selective sample from urban locations. (Epidemiology
2013;24: 555--561)

Submitted 29 May 2012; accepted 8 January 2013; posted 14 May 2013. From
the aDepartment of Environmental Health - Exposure, Epidemiology and
Risk Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA; b Science
Systems and Applications, Inc, Lanham, MD; and cDepartment of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA. Supported by
The Harvard Environmental Protection Agency Center Grant RD83479801, NIH
grant ES012044, and the Environment and Health Fund Israel.
Correspondence: Itai Kloog, Department of Environmental Health -
Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard School of Public
Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Dr. West, Boston, MA 02215. E-mail:
ekloog@hsph.harvard.edu. Copyright © 2013 by Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins ISSN: 1044-3983/13/2404-0555 DOI: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e318294beaa

Epidemiology  •  Volume 24, Number 4, July 2013

M

ultiple studies in the United States and worldwide have shown
associations between exposure to ambient particulate matter (PM) and
adverse health effects.1--6 These adverse health effects include
asthma,7 cardiovascular problems,3,8--12 respiratory infections,13--17
lung cancer, and mortality.18--22 Previous studies have generally
focused on either longterm (chronic) PM exposure23--26 or short-term
(acute) PM exposure.15,27,28 In addition, studies of acute effects
typically depend on PM2.5 monitors within their study domain. Because
PM2.5 concentrations vary spatially within the study domain, this
introduces exposure error and likely produces a combination of downward
bias in the effect estimates and wider confidence intervals (CIs) due to
a mixture of classical and Berkson error.29 The relative magnitude of
the two effects is not yet clear. The lack of spatially resolved daily
PM2.5 concentration data restricts most studies to areas surrounding
monitoring sites, mostly in cities, which may not be representative of
the population as a whole. Such studies have used mostly citylevel
contrasts, although more recent studies have incorporated estimates from
land-use regression. For example, cohort studies with few exceptions
(eg, the Six City Study) rely upon convenience samples that are not
representative of the population either in demographic or geographic
characteristics, raising questions about generalizability and the
possibility of selection bias. Suburban, exurban, rural, and semirural
populations are particularly under-represented. Similarly, in many
studies, minorities and people with lower educational attainment are
under-represented. In addition, although land-use regression can produce
estimates of exposure at participants addresses, the lack of monitoring
in rural areas to calibrate these models has led to the exclusion of
participants in such locations even when in the cohort.24 Various
studies have tried to address this issue. There are some
population-based chronic-exposure studies that have assessed within-city
exposure and mortality. Naess et al30 looked at chronic exposure to NO2,
PM10, and PM2.5 in 470 neighborhoods and all-cause and cause-speciﬁc
mortality in Oslo, Norway. Exposures were consistently associated with
all causes of death in both age groups for men and women. The
associations were particularly strong for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, which appeared linear whereas cardiovascular causes and lung
cancer seemed to have threshold effects. Gan et al31 looked at specific
traffic-related www.epidem.com  |  555

Kloog et al

air pollutants associated with coronary heart disease (CHD) morbidity
and mortality in Metropolitan Vancouver. This population-based cohort
study included a 5-year exposure period and a 4-year follow-up period.
Individual exposures to traffic-related air pollutants including black
carbon, PM2.5, NO2, and nitric oxide were estimated at residences of the
subjects using land-use regression models. An interquartile range
elevation in the average concentration of black carbon was associated
with a 6% increase in CHD mortality (95% CI = 3--9%) after adjusting for
age, sex, preexisting comorbidity, neighborhood socioeconomic status,
and copollutants (PM2.5 and NO2). Few studies on the long-term effect of
exposure have looked at broader populations. Crouse et al32 looked at
the risk of cardiovascular mortality in relation to long-term exposure
and PM2.5 in Canada. They assigned estimates of exposure to ambient
PM2.5 derived from satellite observations to a cohort of 2.1 million
Canadian adults. They used both standard Cox proportional survival
models and nested, spatial random-effects survival models. For the Cox
models, they showed hazard ratios (HRs) of 1.15 (95% CI = 1.13--1.16)
from nonaccidental causes and 1.31 (95% CI = 1.27--1.35) from ischemic
heart disease for each 10-μg/m3 increase in concentrations of PM2.5.
Using spatial random-effects models controlling for the same variables,
they showed HRs of 1.10 (95% CI = 1.05--1.15) and 1.30 (95% CI =
1.18--1.43), respectively. Other studies have used new methodological
approaches in air pollution studies regarding short- and long-term
exposure. Künzli33 presents several key approaches in studies of ambient
air pollution. He discusses among other issues how cross-city
longitudinal data are needed to estimate both shortand long-term
effects, and how time-series studies have previously neglected the
long-term component. They also show the importance of disentangling the
contributions of different time domains of air pollution exposure.
Künzli shows that by considering the geography of susceptibility and
exposure, and by using more sophisticated approaches to acknowledge the
“geographies of time,” studies on the total health effects of ambient
air pollution could be considerably improved. Burnett and colleagues34
showed that results from time-series studies are equivalent to estimates
obtained from a dynamic population in which each person's mortality risk
can be summarized as the daily number of deaths. The authors showed that
the association between temporal variation in the environmental
covariates and the survival experience of members of the dynamic
population can be estimated by regressing the daily number of deaths on
the daily value of the environmental covariates, as is done in
time-series mortality studies. We recently presented a novel method of
assessing temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for
epidemiological studies using satellite aerosol optical depth
measurements, which makes it possible to predict daily PM2.5
concentration levels at a 10 × 10 km spatial resolution.35 In this
previous work, we examined the relationship between PM2.5 ground
measurements and Moderate Resolution Imaging 556  |  www.epidem.com

Epidemiology  •  Volume 24, Number 4, July 2013

Spectroradiometer Satellite--derived aerosol optical depth measurements
in New England during the period of 2000-- 2008. Using multistage
prediction models, we initially performed day-specific calibrations of
the satellite using ground PM2.5 measurements from all monitoring sites
in New England and incorporating land-use regression and meteorologic
variables. This use of daily calibration allows us to get considerably
better predictive power, and hence lower exposure error. Later, spatial
smoothing was used to predict PM2.5 concentrations for grid cell-day
combinations when satellite measures are not available. Because our
models produced daily PM2.5 predictions, not monthly or yearly, this
allowed us to estimate the health effects of both short-term and
long-term exposures. In addition, the availability of satellite
measurements in every grid cell improved spatial predictions, compared
with landuse regression models calibrated with monitors in a limited
number of locations. Finally, we incorporated land-use regression as a
final component, which estimates the difference between neighborhood
level (grid cell) values and addressspecific PM2.5 based on land-use
terms within 50 m of the residential address, allowing us to estimate
long-term exposure at an address-specific level. In this follow-up
article, we use our model predictions to study the association between
both long- and short-term PM2.5 exposure and mortality in the entire
population of Massachusetts during the period 2000--2008.

METHODS Study Domain The study was conducted in Massachusetts (Figure).
To avoid boundary effects, some PM2.5 data from neighboring states were
included in the analysis.

Exposure Data Data for both short- and long-term PM2.5 exposures for the
years 2000--2008 were assessed using recently developed prediction
models.35 The Massachusetts exposure dataset encompasses daily PM2.5
predictions at a resolution of 10 × 10 km. In addition, we predicted
365-day moving averages of grid-cell PM2.5 to look at chronic effects
and local deviations from the grid-cell predictions (from land-use
regression) on a 50 × 50 m spatial resolution across the state (Figure)
during the entire study period. Because the Boston metropolitan area
within the Route 128 comprises 15 cells, this allows us to resolve
exposure within the city. The local land-use component allows further
resolution to the address level, but only for long-term exposure. For
more detailed information on the prediction model please refer to Kloog
et al.35 We then generated daily and long-term PM2.5 exposure to each
decedent based on their address. Our generated predictions have multiple
advantages over other approaches commonly used in other health studies
such as inverse distance weighting, kriging, etc. First, the smooth
function of latitude and longitude is effectively © 2013 Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins

Epidemiology  •  Volume 24, Number 4, July 2013

Mortality and Long- and Short-Term Exposure to PM2.5

FIGURE.  Map of the study area showing the dithered residential location
of a subset of mortality cases over a sample PM2.5 (µg/m3) 10 × 10 km
pollution grid for a sample day (01/07/2001).

a weighting scheme, with some important differences. The weights do not
have to be isotropic, they can have a functional form be other than
inverse distance squared, and they can vary every 2 months (unlike
distance-based weights, which are fixed). To this we add the additional
information provided by the daily satellite measurement near the
residence and the local land-use regression results. There are many US
cities with only one monitor close to the city. In such cases, inverse
distance weighting would be of no practical use, whereas our methods
would produce exposure contrasts across the various cities' 10 × 10 km
grid, as well as the local land-use regression.

Mortality Data Individual georeferenced mortality records were obtained
from the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for all available
years (2000--2008). The dataset included 468,570 deaths. Our model can
include locations both proximate and far from ambient monitoring
stations. We defined “near” as within 20 km of an ambient monitor. The
near areas contain 80% of the population, with the rest in the “far”
areas (more than 20 km from an ambient monitor). Public health records
included residential location, place of death, age, sex, date of death,
ethnicity, education, and primary cause of death. From these data, we
constructed daily death counts for each 10 × 10 km grid cell for our
time-series analysis; long-term exposure was assigned based on
residential address.

Mortality Covariates Temperature Data As in other PM mortality studies,
temperature was used as a covariate.36,37 Temperature data were obtained
from the national climatic data center.38 Only continuously operating
stations with daily data from 2000 to 2008 were used. Grid cells were
matched to the closest weather station.

Socioeconomic Data Socioeconomic variables for the tract level were
obtained from the 2000 US census with data on social, © 2013 Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins

economic, and housing characteristics.39 Socioeconomic variables at the
census-tract level included percent minorities, age, education, and
income. In addition we used individual socioeconomic variables from the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health mortality records (race,
education, and sex).

Smoking Surrogate As a surrogate for cell-specific smoking experience,
we used the long-term average lung cancer mortality rate in each cell as
a control variable. Lung cancer data were obtained through the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

Statistical Methods Geocoded mortality data were matched with our
exposure estimates. Because the mortality datasets did not include
changes of residence, we had to assume when looking at long-term
exposure that the decedents had lived at their current address for
several years. This introduces some exposure misclassification. However,
we think the misclassification is relatively minor. The average age of
decedents in our study population was 75 years, and in the northeast
United States, people above the age of 75 have limited mobility (only 2%
of the population changed residence during 2009--2010).40 We assessed
the acute effects of exposure to PM2.5 by assigning to decedents the
grid exposure (on the day of death and preceding 3 days) corresponding
to their residence for deaths outside of hospital. Deaths in hospital
may have occurred outside the grid cell of residence, and so for those
deaths, we assigned the mean predicted PM2.5 concentration in all grid
cells within 30 km of the residence, again for the day of death and up
to 3 preceding days. Most time-series studies have reported the
strongest acute associations with mean PM2.5 for the current and
previous day, rather than same day exposure41 or longer lags. We
therefore took current and previous day exposures as our primary
analysis. As a sensitivity analysis, we also examined PM2.5 exposure 2
days before death (lag2) and PM2.5 exposure 3 days before death (lag3).
Specifically, we modeled the mortality rate λit in the ith cell on the
tth day as follows: www.epidem.com  |  557

Epidemiology  •  Volume 24, Number 4, July 2013

Kloog et al

log( λit ) = α + λi + β1 PM it + λ (t ) + temporal covariates where λi =
δ + spatial covariates + ei

Characteristic

where PMit is the daily PM2.5 concentration in cell i, λ(t) is a smooth
function of time, temporal covariates are temperature and day of the
week, spatial covariates are socioeconomic factors and a surrogate for
long-term smoking history, and ei is the remaining unexplained
difference in mortality rate between cell i and other cells (treated as
a mean zero normal random effect with variance estimated from the data).
This model expands the usual time-series analysis by including spatial
covariates and random intercepts for small areas. The specific
covariates we used were a linear and quadratic term for temperature with
the same moving average as PM2.5, age, percent minorities, median
income, percent of people without high school education, and lung cancer
rate as a surrogate for long-term smoking history. λ(t) was estimated
with a natural cubic spline with 45 degrees of freedom (5 df per year).
We used an interaction term between in-hospital death and short-term
exposure, to test whether location modified the association. Long-term
exposure was analyzed through a relative incidence analysis. We defined
particle-related deaths as those from cardiovascular and respiratory
diseases and contrasted those with mortality unrelated to air pollution
(accidental death, cancer [except lung cancer], homicide, etc.).
Specifically we fit the following model:

(

)

Logit ( PrMortij = 1| X ) = α + u j + β1 PM it + β2 PMLi + β3i X 3i +
β4i X 41 + ...

(u ) ~ N [0,σ j

u

2

]

where Mortij is the response (particle-related or nonrelated death) for
the ith subject in grid j, α and uj are the fixed and random
(grid-specific) intercepts, respectively, PMit is 365day moving average
ending on day t, PMLi is the local (50 m) deviation of PM2.5 from the
long-term grid-cell average, X3i, etc. denote the set of covariates of
interest used in the model, and σu2 is the variance of the random
effects. We also looked at various interactions of interest, including
interactions between near and far areas and both short-term and
long-term exposure as well as interactions between low and high
education groups (based on individual college education) and long-term
PM2.5 exposure. We considered whether effect estimates differed between
the two main cause-specific mortality rates by performing a logistic
analysis of cardiovascular and respiratory mortality.

RESULTS Of the 468,570 deaths included in our analyses, 46% were men,
94% were white, and 20% had higher than a high 558  |  www.epidem.com

TABLE 1.  Descriptive Statistics: Deaths in Eastern Massachusetts,
2000--2008 No. (%)

Sex  Men  Women Race  White  Black  Other Education (years)  0--12  >12
Age (mean years)

216,717 (46) 251,852 (54) 438,402 (94) 17,479 (4) 12,689 (3) 372,848
(80) 95,722 (20) 75.0

school education. The average age at death was 75 years (Table 1).
Table 2 summarizes of the exposure and temperature variables used in the
analysis. Various lags were tested in the time-series analysis, with the
strongest based on the mean of lag01. The results for lag01 are
presented as commonly reported in many previous studies.14,24 For
every10-µg/ m3 increase in short-term PM2.5 exposure, there was a 2.8%
increase in mortality (95% CI = 2.0--3.5). There was also a significant
interaction between short-term pollution and near and far locations (P <
0.001). For every10-µg/m3 increase in short-term PM2.5 exposure in the
“far” group, there was a 1.4% increase in mortality (95% CI =
0.8--2.0%). For every10-µg/ m3 increase in short-term PM2.5 exposure in
the “near” group, there was a 4.5% increase in mortality (95% CI =
2.6--6.5%). Table 3 presents the odds ratios (ORs) for cardiovascular
and respiratory mortality for a 10-µg/m3 increase in long-term grid-cell
PM2.5 exposure for the full datasets and various interactions. The OR
was 1.6 (CI = 1.5--1.8) for cardiovascular and respiratory mortality
relative to deaths from other causes. Local PM2.5 had an OR of 1.4 (CI =
1.3--1.5) in the same model. Because local PM2.5 was constructed as the
addressspecific deviation from the grid-cell average, these effects are
independent and additive. There was a significant interaction between
education group and long-term pollution (P<0.001). The OR for the high
education group (college education) was 1.4 (CI = 1.2--1.6), whereas for
the remainder the OR was TABLE 2.  Descriptive Statistics for PM2.5
Exposure and Temperature for 2,495 Days with Available Data,
Massachusetts, 2000--2008

Acute PM (µg/m3) Chronic PM (µg/m3) Temperature (°C)

Mean

Median

Standard Deviation

Range

Q1

Q3

 9.8  9.9 45.6

 8.7 10.0 46.9

 4.5  1.2 19.0

 93.7  24.1 110.3

 6.6  9.1 31.2

11.9 10.7 62.1

© 2013 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

Epidemiology  •  Volume 24, Number 4, July 2013

TABLE 3.  ORs for Cardiovascular Disease and Respiratory Mortality for
Every10 µg/m3 Increase in Long-Term PM2.5 Exposure PM2.5 Exposure Type

Odds Ratio (95% CI)

All mortality cases long-term PM2.5 All mortality cases local PM2.5
Urban areas Rural areas High education Low education

1.6 (1.5--1.8) 1.4 (1.3--1.5) 1.7 (1.5--1.9) 1.3 (1.1--1.6) 1.4
(1.2--1.6) 1.9 (1.60--2.1)

1.9 (CI = 1.6--2.1). There was also a significant interaction between
long-term pollution and near and far groups (P < 0.001). The OR for
subjects living more than 20 km from a monitor was 1.3 (CI = 1.1--1.6),
whereas for those living closer, the OR was 1.7 (CI = 1.5--1.9). The OR
for nonwhites (OR 2.9, CI = 1.9--4.5) was higher than for whites (OR
1.6, CI = 1.4--1.7). The logistic regression comparing cardiovascular
and respiratory mortality showed no appreciable differences both for the
regional PM2.5 and local PM2.5 exposure. Similarly, there were no
important risk differences between people who died in the hospital and
those who died at home.

DISCUSSION The main feature of this study is the use of novel hybrid
prediction models that examine short- and long-term exposure
associations with mortality, and include the entire population of the
state. Unlike traditional land-use regressions, this model produces
daily predictions. This model also performs better in regions far from
monitors because the satellite data provide exposure data. In addition,
these models can 1) control for small area socioeconomic status
variables in time-series analysis and look for effect modification by
the same variables; 2) test whether the PM2.5 slope is different in
people residing far from monitors; 3) assess chronic effects of
particles using the entire population, again including people distant
from monitors; 4) estimate effects of local traffic--derived particles
independent of regional particles; and 5) reduce exposure error and
hence downward bias in slopes, and upward bias in CIs. Key findings
include differences in the slopes of acute and chronic PM2.5 between
locations closer or more distant from monitoring stations, interactions
of chronic exposure with race and socioeconomic status (with less
advantaged groups having stronger associations), and an additional
effect of traffic particles generated near the address of the decedents.
The Six City Study42,43 found that a 1-year period for chronic exposure
captured essentially the entire effect. Hence our use of a 1-year
average should be sufficient to capture the longterm effect of PM2.5
exposure. It is instructive to compare these results with results of
previous time-series and cohort studies. Zanobetti and © 2013 Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins

Mortality and Long- and Short-Term Exposure to PM2.5

colleagues studied the acute effect of fine and coarse particulate air
pollution on mortality in a national analysis of 112 cities.44 For
cities similar to cities in our study (the northeast area, grouped as
cities with warm summer-continental), a 10-µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 was
associated with a 1.19% increase (95% CI = 0.73--1.64) in total
mortality. A key difference is that they assigned the same daily
exposure to all people in each city, whereas we were able to assign
different exposures to people on a relatively small grid. Another key
difference is that they analyzed only cities, whereas we could analyze
an entire state. Our study finds larger and more precise effect-size
estimates despite analyzing fewer deaths, possibly due to reduced
exposure error. Berkson measurement error for exposure would be expected
to bias standard errors upward, but not bias effect sizes down, whereas
classical exposure error would do the opposite. If exposure error was a
mixture of these two types, reduced exposure error could produce results
such as we observed. This does not preclude other explanations. Miller
et al45 reported a relative risk of 1.76 for cardiovascular deaths per
10 μg/m3 using within-city exposure, and Puett and colleagues24 used
exposure from a land-use regression analysis to estimate a hazard ratio
of 1.26 for all-cause mortality (95% CI = 1.02‒1.54) with each 10-µg/m3
increase in annual PM2.5 exposure. These estimates are similar to ours
and higher than in older studies that did not have geographically
resolved exposure. That suggests the exposure error in cohort studies is
predominantly classical. The similarly larger estimate in our study
supports this conclusion, and also extends the results to suburban and
rural residents. Furthermore, our use of satellite exposure data allowed
a much larger sample size, with more deaths than in the American Cancer
Society (ACS) study, the Nurses' Health Study, and the Six City Study
combined. We confirm the results of the ACS study that people with less
education have greater susceptibility to particles, although the
association in the college educated is still substantial, and with a
relatively narrow CI. Although covariate control is a limitation of this
analysis, the use of fine-scale geographically resolved exposure is a
clear advantage over studies such as the first reports from ACS study,
which used metropolitan areas often encompassing multiple counties, and
often with only one monitor available to assign exposure. A reanalysis
of the data by Willis et al,46 restricted to people who live closer to
the monitor, reported a doubling of the estimate slope per unit
exposure, suggesting substantial downward bias by classical measurement
error. These results plus the similarity between our estimates and other
estimates based on geographically resolved exposure24,47 provides some
assurance about the generalizability of those estimates. As noted above,
we see smaller effects in locations more than 20 km from monitors, which
generally have lower population density. This may reflect different
composition (more traffic particles in the more densely populated
regions), although further analysis is needed to confirm this.
Consistent www.epidem.com  |  559

Epidemiology  •  Volume 24, Number 4, July 2013

Kloog et al

with this, we found that deviations from grid-cell-average PM2.5
predicted by land-use terms within 50 m of residence had additional
predictive power for mortality. This also suggests that traffic
particles are more toxic. A key difference between our analysis and the
ACS or Nurses Health study is that they oversampled the highly educated,
undersampled minorities. In general, cohort studies of the long-term
effects of PM2.5 have been nonrepresentative. Our finding of a
substantially stronger associations in nonwhites and the less educated
raises an important environmental justice concern. Another major
limitation of the present study is the spatial resolution of 10 × 10 km.
We compensate for this in our analysis of chronic effects by using a
land-use regression to compute a local PM variable. Better resolution of
the satellite data would clearly be beneficial and should become
available. As satellite remote sensing evolves, higher spatial
resolution data (eg, 3 × 3 km and 1 × 1 km) will further reduce exposure
error. Our mortality datasets did not include changes in residence,
which will introduce some exposure misclassification into our study. In
conclusion, our novel prediction models, making use of satellite data on
air pollution, perform well in assessing short-term and long-term
effects of PM2.5 exposure. This enables us to examine entire
populations, including exurban and rural locations, with better spatial
resolution and tighter CIs for the time-series estimates. The larger
effect-size estimates seen in recent cohort studies (using
geographically resolved chronic exposures) are supported in this
analysis for a whole population. This modeling approach presents new
opportunities to study the effects of both short- and long-term particle
exposures on human health.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Steven J. Melly, Department of Environmental
Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard University. REFERENCES
1. Atkinson RW, Anderson HR, Sunyer J, et al. Acute effects of
particulate air pollution on respiratory admissions: results from APHEA
2 project. Air Pollution and Health: a European Approach. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med. 2001;164(10 Pt 1):1860--1866. 2. Gold DR, Litonjua A,
Schwartz J, et al. Ambient pollution and heart rate variability.
Circulation. 2000;101:1267--1273. 3. Le Tertre A, Medina S, Samoli E, et
al. Short-term effects of particulate air pollution on cardiovascular
diseases in eight European cities. J Epidemiol Community Health.
2002;56:773--779. 4. Salvi S, Blomberg A, Rudell B, et al. Acute
inflammatory responses in the airways and peripheral blood after
short-term exposure to diesel exhaust in healthy human volunteers. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 1999;159: 702--709. 5. Schwartz J. Air pollution
and hospital admissions for the elderly in Detroit, Michigan. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 1994;150:648--655. 6. Schwartz J. Air pollution
and blood markers of cardiovascular risk. Environ Health Perspect.
2001;109(suppl 3):405--409. 7. Lin S, Munsie JP, Hwang SA, Fitzgerald E,
Cayo MR. Childhood asthma hospitalization and residential exposure to
state route traffic. Environ Res. 2002;88:73--81.

560  |  www.epidem.com

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
     8.  Barnett AG, Williams GM, Schwartz J, et al. The effects of air pollution on
#+END_EXAMPLE

hospitalizations for cardiovascular disease in elderly people in
Australian and New Zealand cities. Environ Health Perspect.
2006;114:1018--1023. 9. Wellenius GA, Bateson TF, Mittleman MA, Schwartz
J. Particulate air pollution and the rate of hospitalization for
congestive heart failure among medicare beneficiaries in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. Am J Epidemiol. 2005;161:1030--1036. 10. Peters A,
Fröhlich M, Döring A, et al. Particulate air pollution is associated
with an acute phase response in men; results from the MONICAAugsburg
Study. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:1198--1204. 11. Zanobetti A, Schwartz J,
Dockery DW. Airborne particles are a risk factor for hospital admissions
for heart and lung disease. Environ Health Perspect.
2000;108:1071--1077. 12. Schwartz J, Morris R. Air pollution and
hospital admissions for cardiovascular disease in Detroit, Michigan. Am
J Epidemiol. 1995;142: 23--35. 13. Baccarelli A. Breathe deeply into
your genes!: genetic variants and air pollution effects. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med. 2009;179:431--432. 14. Zanobetti A, Franklin M, Koutrakis
P, Schwartz J. Fine particulate air pollution and its components in
association with cause-specific emergency admissions. Environ Health.
2009;8:58. 15. Dominici F, Peng RD, Bell ML, et al. Fine particulate air
pollution and hospital admission for cardiovascular and respiratory
diseases. JAMA. 2006;295:1127--1134. 16. Sunyer J, Basagaña X.
Particles, and not gases, are associated with the risk of death in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Int J Epidemiol.
2001;30:1138--1140. 17. Schwartz J. Air pollution and hospital
admissions for respiratory disease. Epidemiology. 1996;7:20--28. 18.
Dockery D, Pope C, Xu X, et al. An association between air pollution and
mortality in six US cities. N Engl J Med. 1993;329:1753--1759. 19.
Franklin M, Zeka A, Schwartz J. Association between PM2. 5 and allcause
and specific-cause mortality in 27 US communities. J Expo Sci Environ
Epidemiol. 2006;17:279--287. 20. Pope CA 3rd, Burnett RT, Thun MJ, et
al. Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term exposure to
fine particulate air pollution. JAMA. 2002;287:1132--1141. 21. Schwartz
J. Air pollution and daily mortality: a review and meta analysis.
Environ Res. 1994;64:36--52. 22. Laden F, Schwartz J, Speizer FE,
Dockery DW. Reduction in fine particulate air pollution and mortality:
extended follow-up of the Harvard Six Cities study. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med. 2006;173:667--672. 23. Hart J, Garshick E, Dockery D, Smith T,
Ryan L, Laden F. Long-term ambient multi-pollutant exposures and
mortality. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011;183:73--78. 24. Puett RC,
Hart JE, Yanosky JD, et al. Chronic fine and coarse particulate
exposure, mortality, and coronary heart disease in the Nurses' Health
Study. Environ Health Perspect. 2009;117:1697--1701. 25. Schwartz J.
Harvesting and long term exposure effects in the relation between air
pollution and mortality. Am J Epidemiol. 2000;151:440--448. 26. Jerrett
M, Burnett RT, Ma R, et al. Spatial analysis of air pollution and
mortality in Los Angeles. Epidemiology. 2005;16:727--736. 27.
Katsouyanni K, Touloumi G, Spix C, et al. Short-term effects of ambient
sulphur dioxide and particulate matter on mortality in 12 European
cities: results from time series data from the APHEA project. Air
Pollution and Health: a European Approach. BMJ. 1997;314:1658--1663. 28.
Schwartz J, Dockery DW. Particulate air pollution and daily mortality in
Steubenville, Ohio. Am J Epidemiol. 1992;135:12--19; discussion 20. 29.
Zeger SL, Thomas D, Dominici F, et al. Exposure measurement error in
time-series studies of air pollution: concepts and consequences. Environ
Health Perspect. 2000;108:419--426. 30. Naess Ø, Nafstad P, Aamodt G,
Claussen B, Rosland P. Relation between concentration of air pollution
and cause-specific mortality: four-year exposures to nitrogen dioxide
and particulate matter pollutants in 470 neighborhoods in Oslo, Norway.
Am J Epidemiol. 2007;165:435--443. 31. Gan WQ, Koehoorn M, Davies HW,
Demers PA, Tamburic L, Brauer M. Long-term exposure to traffic-related
air pollution and the risk of coronary heart disease hospitalization and
mortality. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119:501--507. Available at:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3080932/ Accessed 10 October
2012. 32. Crouse DL, Peters PA, van Donkelaar A, et al. Risk of
nonaccidental and cardiovascular mortality in relation to long-term
exposure to low concen-

© 2013 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

Epidemiology  •  Volume 24, Number 4, July 2013

trations of fine particulate matter: a Canadian National-Level Cohort
Study. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120:708--714. Available at:
http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3346774/ Accessed 10
October 2012. 33. Künzli N. Unifying susceptibility, exposure, and time:
discussion of unifying analytic approaches and future directions. J
Toxicol Environ Health A. 2005;68:1263--1271. Available at:
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/ abs/10.1080/15287390590936102 Accessed
10 November 2012. 34. Burnett RT, Dewanji A, Dominici F, Goldberg MS,
Cohen A, Krewski D. On the relationship between time-series studies,
dynamic population studies, and estimating loss of life due to
short-term exposure to environmental risks. Environ Health Perspect.
2003;111:1170--1174. Copyright © 2003 The National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS). Available at:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3435505 Accessed 10 October 2012. 35. Kloog
I, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J. Assessing temporally and
spatially resolved PM2. 5exposures for epidemiological studies using
satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos Environ.
2011;45:6267--6275. 36. Schwartz J. Is the association of airborne
particles with daily deaths confounded by gaseous air pollutants? An
approach to control by matching. Environ Health Perspect.
2004;112:557--561. 37. Schwartz J. The effects of particulate air
pollution on daily deaths: a multicity case crossover analysis. Occup
Environ Med. 2004;61:956--961. 38. National Climatic Data Center. The
National Climatic Data Center

Data Inventories. Asheville, NC: NOAA National Climatic Data Center
(NCDC); 2010.

© 2013 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

Mortality and Long- and Short-Term Exposure to PM2.5

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
    39.  Census US. U.S. Census of Population and Housing. Washington, DC:
#+END_EXAMPLE

U.S. Dept. of Commerce; 2000. 40. Census US. Current Population Survey,
2010 Annual Social and Economic Supplement. Government Printing Office;
2011. 41. Schwartz J, Dockery DW, Neas LM. Is daily mortality associated
specifically with fine particles? J Air Waste Manag Assoc.
1996;46:927--939. 42. Lepeule J, Laden F, Dockery D, Schwartz J. Chronic
exposure to fine particles and mortality: an extended follow-up of the
Harvard Six Cities study from 1974 to 2009. Environ Health Perspect.
2012;120:965--970. 43. Schwartz J, Coull B, Laden F, Ryan L. The effect
of dose and timing of dose on the association between airborne particles
and survival. Environ Health Perspect. 2008;116:64--69. 44. Zanobetti A,
Schwartz J. The effect of fine and coarse particulate air pollution on
mortality: a national analysis. Environ Health Perspect.
2009;117:898--903. 45. Miller KA, Siscovick DS, Sheppard L, et al.
Long-term exposure to air pollution and incidence of cardiovascular
events in women. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:447--458. 46. Willis A, Jerrett
M, Burnett RT, Krewski D. The association between sulfate air pollution
and mortality at the county scale: an exploration of the impact of scale
on a long-term exposure study. J Toxicol Environ Health A.
2003;66:1605--1624. 47. Miller KA, Siscovick DS, Sheppard L, et al.
Long-term exposure to air pollution and incidence of cardiovascular
events in women. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:447--458.

www.epidem.com  |  561


