Chronobiology International, 28(1): 76--80, (2011) Copyright © Informa
Healthcare USA, Inc. ISSN 0742-0528 print/1525-6073 online DOI:
10.3109/07420528.2010.531490

SHORT COMMUNICATION

Does the Modern Urbanized Sleeping Habitat Pose a Breast Cancer Risk?
Itai Kloog,1,4 Boris A. Portnov,1 Hedy S. Rennert,2 and Abraham Haim3

Chronobiol Int Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Francis A
Countway Library of Medicine on 10/01/14 For personal use only.

1

Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Management, Graduate
School of Management, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 2Department of
Community Medicine and Epidemiology, Carmel Medical Center and Bruce
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion--Israel Institute of Technology
and Clalit Health Services National Cancer Control Center, Haifa,
Israel, 3The Israeli Center for Interdisciplinary Research in
Chronobiology, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 4Department of
Environmental Health---Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Due to its disruptive effects on circadian rhythms and sleep deprivation
at night, shiftworking is currently recognized as a risk factor for
breast cancer (BC). As revealed by the present analysis based on a
comparative case-control study of 1679 women, exposure to light-at-night
(LAN) in the “sleeping habitat” is significantly associated with BC risk
(odds ratio [OR] = 1.220, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.118--1.311; p
< .001), controlling for education, ethnicity, fertility, and alcohol
consumption. The novelty of the present research is that, to the best of
the authors' knowledge, it is the first study to have identified an
unequivocal positive association between bedroom-light intensity and BC
risk. Thus, according to the results of the present study, not only
should artificial light exposure in the working environment be
considered as a potential risk factor for BC, but also LAN in the
“sleeping habitat.” (Author correspondence: ahaim@research.haifa.ac.il)
Keywords: Breast cancer, Circadian disruption, Light-at-night, Light
pollution, Sleeping habitat

INTRODUCTION

and affordable for wide segments of the population, resulting in
increased LAN exposure in both outdoor, such as public areas and
transportation, and indoor spaces, such as workplaces, apartments, and
houses. Although several empirical studies have been conducted to
evaluate the effects of work-related and outdoor light pollution on
hormone-dependent cancers (Davis et al., 2001; Kloog et al., 2008,
2009a, 2009b, 2010; Schernhammer et al., 2006), the association between
LAN exposure in the bedroom of apartments and houses (which we term the
“sleeping habitat”) and cancer has largely escaped investigation, and
the existing evidence is essentially scarce. In the framework of their
Long Island study, O'Leary and colleagues (2006) conducted personal
interviews to trace LAN-exposure histories at work and home. The study
cohort included 576 women diagnosed with BC and 585 population-based
controls. The questionnaire included questions about the number of sleep
hours, frequency of turning lights-on during the night, and the length
of time the light was on during the nighttime, but it did not include
questions about bedroomlight intensity. The analysis of the data
revealed that women who frequently turned on lights during the sleep
hours exhibited an increased BC risk (odds ratio

Several possible mechanisms have been suggested in recent years to
explain the association between exposure to light pollution, termed
“light-at-night” (LAN), and breast cancer (BC). These mechanisms include
the suppression of melatonin (MLT) secretion by the pineal gland leading
to increased tumor growth (Blask et al., 2005) and the adverse effects
of LAN on thermoregulatory (Haim et al., 2005) and immune functions
(Nelson, 2004; Stevens et al., 2007). The “LAN-BC” theory is supported
by the results of several recent epidemiological studies carried out at
various population levels (Kloog et al., 2008, 2009a, 2010) that
indicated exposure to LAN was associated with elevated BC rates, whereas
no such an association was found for lung cancer. Other studies provided
further evidence that women working night shifts are at high risk of
developing BC (Davis et al., 2001; Hansen, 2001; Schernhammer et al.,
2001), whereas studies on blind women have found BC rates to be lower
than those of visually unimpaired women in the same populations
(Feychting et al., 1998; Kliukiene et al., 2001; Verkasalo et al.,
1999). With accelerating urbanization worldwide and rising living
standards, electricity has become more accessible

Submitted June 1, 2010, Returned for revision June 2, 2010, Accepted
October 2, 2010 Address correspondence to: Prof. Abraham Haim, The
Israeli Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Chronobiology,
University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, Israel 31905. Tel.:
972-4-8288784; E-mail: ahaim@research.haifa.ac.il



Chronobiol Int Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Francis A
Countway Library of Medicine on 10/01/14 For personal use only.

The Sleeping Habitat and Breast Cancer Risk [OR] = 1.65, 95% confidence
interval [CI]: 1.02--2.69). In another study, Davis and colleagues
(2001) investigated whether exposure to LAN at home is associated with
an increased risk of BC in women. The study included 813 cancer patients
aged 20--74 yrs and 793 control subjects of comparable age. Personal
interviews were conducted to gather information on sleep habits and the
bedroom-light environment 10 yrs before diagnosis and lifetime
occupational history. Conditional logistic regression was then used to
adjust for other potential risk factors, such as family history of
cancer, parity, oral-contraceptive use, and hormone-replacement therapy.
Although the analysis revealed that BC risk was significantly higher
among subjects with sleep disturbance (OR = 1.14, 95% CI = 1.01--1.28),
no clear association between bedroom-light intensity and BC was found
(OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 0.8--2.6). In the past decade, electricity
consumption and LAN intensity increased worldwide, and new lighting
sources have been introduced, which include the modern outdoor
high-intensity discharge (HID) and ﬂuorescent lamps that emit blue
wavelengths (Pauley, 2004). These new developments may have presumably
strengthened the LAN-BC association. In the present study, we compared
light intensities in the “sleeping habitat” of 794 BC patients with
light intensities at homes of a control group of 885 women residing in
northern Israel. Our working hypothesis was as follows: If exposure to
LAN elevates BC risk, then BC patients should have been exposed to
higher LAN levels in their “sleeping habitat” than those without BC of
the control group, controlling for individual level confounders.
RESEARCH METHODS Participants Data on 1679 women (794 women with BC and
885 controls) were obtained from the “Breast Cancer in Northern Israel”
study, initiated in 2000 and which focused on the molecular and
environmental etiology of BC in Northern Israel (Rennert et al., 2010).
Northern Israel is formed by two administrative districts---the Haifa
district and the Northern district---with a combined population of over
2,000,000 residents (ICBS, 2010). In the Haifa district, about 71% of
the total population are Jewish, while 29% are Arabs and other ethnic
minorities; whereas in the Northern district, 44.2% of the population
are Jewish, while the rest (55.8%) are Arab Muslims and other ethnic
minorities (ICBS, 2010). All women residing in the region and diagnosed
with BC since 2000 were invited to participate in the study. Questions
on LAN exposure were added to the general study questionnaire in
mid-2006, and the present study covers 1679 women (794 cases and 885
controls) who responded to the “extended” questionnaire between 2006 and
2008. Frequency matching, which was used in the present study, is a
variation of stratified sampling that is commonly used in empirical
studies (cf., e.g., Rothman © Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.



et al., 2008). Instead of predetermining the number of cases and
controls to be selected within each population stratum (stratified
sampling), frequency matching involves the selection of cases at random,
with controls being taken from the corresponding subgroups in proportion
to the number of cases (Rothman et al., 2008). Controls were randomly
selected from the list of women enrolled in the health-care program
provided by the Clalit Health Services, the largest health-care provider
in Israel, which covers approximately 60% of the country's adult
population. Health-care coverage in Israel is mandatory, and all study
participants (both patients and controls) had similar health-insurance
coverage and similar access to health services. Cases and controls were
matched by age, location of primary clinic, and ethnicity---Jewish
versus non-Jewish (Table 1). Respondents reporting any previous BC were
excluded. All participants were individually interviewed to obtain data,
including reproductive and general medical history, alcohol consumption,
LAN exposure, and socioeconomic status in order to include these
confounders in our model. The overall study response rate was 85.6% of
the approached cases and 51.6% among controls. All participants signed a
consent form approved by the Carmel Medical Center's institutional
review board committee, and all aspects of the study complied with the
ethical standards of the journal (Portaluppi et al., 2010). Exposure
Data LAN exposure was evaluated from individual interviews regarding
exposure to both LAN from outside sources and from sources within the
households (bedroomlight levels, light coming from outside the bedroom,
availability of shutters in the bedroom, and sleeping with the
television on. Nighttime bedroom-light level was evaluated using a
4-point scale: from completely dark (score of 1) to strong light (score
of 4). The exact wording of the question was as follows: “How do you
define your nighttime bedroom-light level? “1” (completely dark), “2”
(low light), “3” (average light), or “4” (very strong light---all lights
switched on). Other LAN exposure-related questions included the
availability of bedroom shutters and sleeping with the television left
on. The answers to these questions were coded dichotomously, that is,
yes or no. Other questions in the questionnaire referred to alcohol
consumption, number of births, religion, age, and education. Statistical
Analysis Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS17TM software and
the probability p < .05 (two-sided) was set as the accepted level of
statistical significance. Contingency tables, t tests, and unconditional
binary logistic regressions were then used to assess the association
between exposure to LAN and BC risk, with adjustment for potential
confounders.

 I. Kloog et al. TABLE 1. Descriptive statistics of the research
variables

Chronobiol Int Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Francis A
Countway Library of Medicine on 10/01/14 For personal use only.

Variable Age (yrs) Alcohol consumption Yes No Total Bedroom light None
(0) Low (1) Average (2) High (3) Total Bedroom shutters Open Closed
Total Education (yrs) >12 yrs <12 yrs Total No. births by religion
Jewish Non-Jewish Total TV on while sleeping Yes No Total

Cases

Controls

OR (95% CI)

58.89 (13.69)*

60.86 (13.51)*

0.127†

143 (13%) 691 (87%) 794 (100%)

142 (16%) 743 (84%) 885 (100%)

0.780 (0.593--1.026)

369 106 85 234 794

(46.5%) (13.4%) (10.7%) (29.5%) (100%)

479 (54.1%) 112 (12.7%) 94 (10.6%) 200 (22.6%) 885 (100%)

1.359 (1.121--1.647)

527 (66.4%) 267 (33.6%) 794 (100%)

629 (71.1%) 256 (28.9%) 885 (100%)

0.803 (0.653--0.988)

223 (29.3%) 561 (70.7%) 794 (100%) 2.83 (2.02)* 609 (76.7%) 185 (23.3%)
794 (100%)

223 (25.2%) 662 (74.8%) 885 (100%) 3.17 (2.16)* 668 (75.5%) 217 (24.5%)
885 (100%)

180 (22.7 %) 614 (77.3%) 794 (100%)

216 (24.4%) 669 (75.6%) 885 (100%)

1.233 (0.994--1.529) <0.01†

1.069 (0.854--1.339)

0.908 (0.724--1.138)

*Mean value and standard deviation in the parentheses, number of cases
(percent of total) for all other cases. † Statistically significant
differences between groups by t test.

RESULTS Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the research
variables. Table 2 reports the results of the binary logistic
regressions run for the whole sample, and Table 3 reports the results of
the binary logistic regressions run for the Jewish women separately to
allow for more homogeneity in the analyses. As Table 2 shows, the
intensity of bedroom light emerged as the strongest predictor of BC,
which appears to increase its risk significantly (OR = 1.220, 95% CI =
1.118--1.311; p < .001). Religion (Jews versus nonJews) and number of
births also emerged as statistically

TABLE 2. Factors affecting BC incidence (method: binary logistic
regression)* Variable

p value

significant (OR = 0.737, 95% CI = 0.556--0.977, p < .05, and OR = 0.932,
95% CI = 0.886--0.979, p < .01, respectively), implying that Jewish
women (who exhibit much lower birth rates---2.72 births for Jews versus
4.07 for Arabs) are at higher risk of developing BC than nonJewish
survey participants. Other variables, e.g., alcohol consumption,
education, etc., did not emerge as being significant determinants (p >
.05). The results of the regression analysis run for Jewish women
separately (Table 3) were essentially similar to the results obtained
for the entire sample (Table 2), with the exception of one
variable---alcohol consumption, which emerged as statistically
significant (p < .05).

TABLE 3. Factors affecting BC incidence (method: binary logistic
regression; Jewish population only)*

OR (95% CI) Variable

Age (yrs) Alcohol consumption (yes) Bedroom light (scoring 1 to 4)
Bedroom shutters (open) Education (>12 yrs) Number of births Religion
(non-Jewish) TV on while sleeping (yes)

.300 .097 <.001 .060 .187 .005 .034 .443

0.996 0.787 1.220 0.818 0.857 0.932 0.737 0.914

(0.988--1.004) (0.593--1.004) (1.118--1.311) (0.663--1.008)
(0.861--1.078) (0.886--0.979) (0.556--0.977) (0.725--1.151)

*Total number of observations = 1679 (794 cases/885 controls).

Age (yrs) Alcohol consumption (yes) Bedroom light (scoring 1 to 4)
Bedroom shutters (open) Education (>12 yrs) Number of births TV on while
sleeping (yes)

p value

OR (95% CI)

.163 .017 <.001 .220 .232 .015 .215

0.994 (0.985--1.003) 0.688 (0.507--0.935) 1.278 (1.115--1.414) 0.859
(0.673--1.096) 0.857 (0.666--1.103) 0.917 (0.855--0.984) 0.846
(0.649--1.102)

*Total number of observations = 1277 (609 cases/668 controls).
Chronobiology International

The Sleeping Habitat and Breast Cancer Risk The protective effect of
this factor (OR = 0.688, 95% CI = 0.507--0.935) may be attributed to the
fact that alcohol consumption in Israel, in general, is low, especially
among women, and is mostly limited to red wine, as common for most
non-Muslim countries of the Mediterranean (Kesteloot, 2004). Several
studies have shown that red-wine consumption in small quantities can
exert a protective effect against the development of BC (Damianaki et
al., 2000; Soleas et al., 2002).

Chronobiol Int Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Francis A
Countway Library of Medicine on 10/01/14 For personal use only.

DISCUSSION The present analysis is based on a comparative casecontrol
study of 1679 women (794 cases and 885 controls) who were individually
interviewed about their lifestyle and LAN exposure. The study revealed
that exposure to LAN in the “sleeping habitat” was significantly
associated with BC, controlling for education, ethnicity, fertility, and
alcohol consumption. Our results are thus consistent with those of
previous studies that revealed a significant LAN-BC association (Kloog
et al., 2008, 2009a, 2009b, 2010; Schernhammer et al., 2001). Our
results also correspond with those of the case-control studies conducted
by O'Leary and colleagues (2006) and Davis and colleagues (2001).
However, in the research reported here, the association between
bedroom-light intensity and BC ( p < .001) was stronger than it was in
the study by Davis and colleagues (2001), thus supporting our working
hypothesis of a linkage between LAN exposure and BC. This difference in
results may have several explanations. First, our study population was
relatively homogenous, with a separate analysis performed for Jewish
women, whereas the study by Davis and colleagues (2001) involved a more
heterogeneous general population of diverse ethnic background. Second,
it should be borne in mind that the study by Davis and colleagues (2001)
was conducted some 15 yrs ago (in 1992--1995). Since then, light
pollution has increased, and women are currently exposed to higher
light-intensity levels. Lastly, in the past decade, light bulbs emitting
bluer light waves (∼460 nm) have been widely introduced to save energy
consumption and reduce CO2 emission. The results of a study carried out
by Cajochen and colleagues (2005) revealed that short-wavelength light
(460 nm) given for 2 h in the late evening decreased MLT production
while increasing alertness, body temperature, and heart rate.
Concurrently, exposure to a wavelength of 550 nm for the same duration
of time did not cause such effects. Better understanding in the last
decades of the way by which light is transferred from the retina to
different areas of the brain has opened new areas for research. The
discovery of the non--image-forming photoreceptors (NIFPs) and the
non-vision pigment melanopsin (Berson et al., 2002) enhanced
chronobiological research, showing that even a subterranean rodent, such
as the “blind” mole rat Spalax ehernbergi, is photosensitive to
different © Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.



photoperiod regimes (Haim et al., 1983), light intensities, and
wavelengths (Zubidat et al., 2009, 2010). Therefore, our vision system,
which evolved from a mammalian system that entailed a subterranean stage
in evolution (Vaughan, 1972), became more complex as it includes more
types of functional photoreceptors whereby the NIFPs seem to play a
major role in regulating circadian systems. It is interesting to note
that recent reviews on MLT, LAN, and BC (Haus, 2009; Srinivasan et al.,
2008) report that nighttime MLT treatment in physiological
concentrations acts like an endogenous antiestrogen that can decrease
the formation of estrogens from androgens through inhibition of the
aromatase enzyme. This finding suggests the importance of MLT in
modulating estrogen levels in relation to BC risk. The International
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) recently recognized shiftworking as
a 2A probable human carcinogen risk factor (Straif et al., 2007).
Shiftworkers are exposed to high LAN intensity in their work environment
during the dark period of the 24-h cycle, when pineal MLT should be
produced and secreted into the plasma, thus causing circadian rhythm
disruption. This suppression of pineal MLT production may lead to
increased tumor growth of hormone-dependent cancers (Blask et al.,
2005). The novelty of the present research lies in the fact that to the
best of our knowledge, this is the first large-scale case-control study
of the general population that has identified a significant positive
association between bedroom light (“sleeping habitat”) and ambient
nighttime light (light pollution) levels with BC risk, providing
evidence that the relative risk of BC appears to increase in more
illuminated sleeping environments. Our main conclusion is that not only
should LAN in the working environment be considered a potential BC risk
factor, as noted in shiftworker studies (Hansen, 2001), but also the
modern human “sleeping habitat” with high LAN levels. The main
limitation of the present study is that we were unable to measure
precise light levels in the “sleeping habitat,” which would have been a
more accurate way of measuring LAN in the bedroom compared to the limits
of a questionnaire-based method. We attempted to compensate for this
limitation, at least in part, by the application of a well-designed
questionnaire and through study of a relatively large number of
participants (n = 1679), thereby resulting in good statistical power.
Nevertheless, more precise measurements of light levels in the “sleeping
habitat” should be investigated in follow-up studies. Moreover, the fact
that the response rate of the invited participants was not 100% may also
be viewed as an additional limitation of the study. Beyond doubts, LAN
is an integral part of our lifestyle and that in the future LAN levels
may increase. Fortunately, this is an environmental variable that can
easily be controlled, thus reducing its health risk. Simple solutions
exist to avoid the penetration of street illumination

 I. Kloog et al. into the “sleeping habitat,” such as by the
installation of window blinds in the bedroom, and also by the use of eye
covers while sleeping.

Chronobiol Int Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Francis A
Countway Library of Medicine on 10/01/14 For personal use only.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to Prof. Gad Rennert of the Carmel
Medical Center and Bruce Rappaport, the Faculty of Medicine of Technion,
for incorporating LAN-related questions to an ongoing case-control study
of the molecular and environmental etiology of breast cancer in Israel
and granting us access to the survey results. Our gratitude is also due
to three anonymous reviewers for their numerous helpful comments and
suggestions. Declaration of Interest: The authors report no conflicts of
interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing
of the paper. REFERENCES Berson DM, Dunn FA,Takao M. (2002).
Phototransduction by retinal ganglion cells that set the circadian
clock. Science 295:1070--1073. Blask DE, Brainard GC, Dauchy RT, Hanifin
JP, Davidson LK, Krause JA, Sauer LA, Rivera-Bermudez MA, Dubocovich ML,
Jasser SA, Lynch DT, Rollag MD, Zalatan F. (2005). Melatonin-depleted
blood from premenopausal women exposed to light at night stimulates
growth of human breast cancer xenografts in nude rats. Cancer Res.
65:11174--11184. Cajochen C, Munch M, Kobialka S, Krauchi K, Steiner R,
Oelhafen P, Orgul S, Wirz-Justice A. (2005). High sensitivity of human
melatonin, alertness, thermoregulation, and heart rate to short
wavelength light. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 90:1311--1316. Damianaki
A, Bakogeorgou E, Kampa M, Notas G, Hatzoglou A, Panagiotou S, Gemetzi
C, Kouroumalis E, Martin PM Castanas E. (2000). Potent inhibitory action
of red wine polyphenols on human breast cancer cells. J.Cell Biochem.
78:429--441. Davis S, Mirick DK, Stevens RG. (2001). Night shift work,
light at night, and risk of breast cancer. J. Natl Cancer Inst.
93:1557--1562. Feychting M, Osterlund B,Ahlbom A. (1998). Reduced cancer
incidence among the blind. Epidemiology 9:490--494. Haim A, Heth G,
Pratt H, Nevo E. (1983). Photoperiodic effects on thermoregulation in a
‘blind' subterranean mammal. J. Exp. Biol. 107:59--64. Haim A, Shanas U,
Zubidad AS, Scantelbry M. (2005). Seasonality and seasons out of
time---the thermoregulatory effects of light interference. Chronobiol.
Int. 22:57--64. Hansen J. (2001). Light at night, shiftwork, and breast
cancer risk. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 93:1513--1515. Haus E. (2009).
Chronobiology in oncology. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 73:3--5.
ICBS. (2010). Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, Jerusalem (http://
www.cbs.gov.il). Kesteloot H. (2004). Alcohol intake and markers of
inflammation. Eur. Heart J. 25:2075--2076. Kliukiene J, Tynes T,
Andersen A. (2001). Risk of breast cancer among Norwegian women with
visual impairment. Br. J. Cancer 84:397--399.

Kloog I, Haim A, Stevens RG, Barchana M, Portnov BA. (2008). Light at
night co-distributes with incident breast but not lung cancer in the
female population of Israel. Chronobiol. Int. 25:65--81. Kloog I, Haim
A, Portnov BA. (2009a). Using kernel density function as an urban
analysis tool: Investigating the association between nightlight exposure
and the incidence of breast cancer in Haifa, Israel. Comput. Environ.
Urban Sys. 33:55--63. Kloog I, Haim A, Stevens RG, Portnov BA. (2009b).
Global co-distribution of light at night (LAN) and cancers of prostate,
colon, and lung in men. Chronobiol. Int. 26:108--125. Kloog I, Stevens
RG, Haim A, Portnov BA. (2010, 3 August). Nighttime light level
co-distributes with breast cancer incidence worldwide. Cancer Causes
Control [ePub ahead print], DOI: 10.1007/s10552010-9624-4. Nelson RJ.
(2004). Seasonal immune function and sickness responses. Trends Immunol.
25:187--192. O'Leary ES, Schoenfeld ER, Stevens RG, Kabat GC, Henderson
K, Grimson R, Gammon MD, Leske MC. (2006). Shift work, light at night,
and breast cancer on Long Island, New York. Am. J. Epidemiol.
164:358--366. Pauley SM. (2004). Lighting for the human circadian clock:
recent research indicates that lighting has become a public health
issue. Med. Hypotheses 63:588--596. Portaluppi F, Smolensky MH, Touitou
Y. (2010). Ethics and methods for biologic research on animals and human
beings. Chronobiol. Int. 27:1911--1929. Rennert G, Pinchev M, Rennert
HS. (2010). Use of bisphosphonates and risk of postmenopausal breast
cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 28:3577--3581. Rothman K, Greenland S. Lash T.
(2008). Modern epidemiology. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins. Schernhammer ES, Laden F, Speizer FE, Willett WC, Hunter DJ,
Kawachi I, Colditz GA. (2001). Rotating night shifts and risk of breast
cancer in women participating in the nurses' health study. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 93:1563--1568. Schernhammer ES, Kroenke CH., Laden F,
Hankinson SE. (2006). Night work and risk of breast cancer. Epidemiology
17:108--111. Soleas GJ, Grass J, Josephy PD, Goldberg DM, Diamandis SP.
(2002). A comparison of the anticarcinogenic properties of four red wine
polyphenols. Clin. Biochem. 35:119--124. Srinivasan V, Spence D,
Pandi-Perumal S, Trakht I, Esquifino A, Cardinali D, Maestroni G.
(2008). Melatonin, environmental light, and breast cancer. Breast Cancer
Res. Treat. 108:339--350. Stevens RG, Blask DE, Brainard GC, Hansen J,
Lockley SW, Provencio I, Rea MS, Reinlib L. (2007). Meeting report: the
role of environmental lighting and circadian disruption in cancer and
other diseases. Environ. Health Perspect. 115:1357--1362. Straif K, R.
Baan R, Grosse Y, Secretan BE, El-Ghissassi F, Bouvard V, Altieri A,
Benbrahim-Tallaa L, Cogliano V. (2007). Carcinogenicity of shift-work,
painting, and fire-fighting. Lancet Oncol. 1 2:1065--1066. Vaughan TA.
(1972). Mammalogy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders. Verkasalo PK, Pukkala E,
Stevens RG, Ojamo M, Rudanko SL. (1999). Inverse association between
breast cancer incidence and degree of visual impairment in Finland. Br.
J. Cancer 80:1459--1460. Zubidat AE, Nelson RJ, Haim A. (2009).
Photosensitivity to different light intensities in blind and sighted
rodents. J. Exp. Biol. 212:3857--3864. Zubidat AE, Nelson RJ, Haim A.
(2010). Photoentrainment in blind and sighted rodent species: responses
to photophase light with different wavelength. J. Exp. Biol. in press.

Chronobiology International


