Research | Children's Health

A Section 508--conformant HTML version of this article is available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1308075.

Using Satellite-Based Spatiotemporal Resolved Air Temperature Exposure
to Study the Association between Ambient Air Temperature and Birth
Outcomes in Massachusetts Itai Kloog,1,2 Steven J. Melly,2 Brent A.
Coull,3 Francesco Nordio,2 and Joel D. Schwartz 2 1Department

of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; 2Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program,
Department of Environmental Health, and 3Department of Biostatistics,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Background: Studies looking at air temperature (Ta) and birth outcomes
are rare. O bjectives : We investigated the association between birth
outcomes and daily Ta during various prenatal exposure periods in
Massachusetts (USA) using both traditional Ta stations and modeled
addresses. Methods: We evaluated birth outcomes and average daily Ta
during various prenatal exposure periods in Massachusetts (USA) using
both traditional Ta stations and modeled address Ta. We used linear and
logistic mixed models and accelerated failure time models to estimate
associations between Ta and the following outcomes among live births
> 22 weeks: term birth weight (≥ 37 weeks), low birth weight (LBW;
< 2,500 g at term), gestational age, and preterm delivery (PT;
< 37 weeks). Models were adjusted for individual-level socioeconomic
status, traffic density, particulate matter ≤ 2.5 μm (PM2.5), random
intercept for census tract, and mother's health. Results: Predicted Ta
during multiple time windows before birth was negatively associated with
birth weight: Average birth weight was 16.7 g lower (95% CI:
--29.7, --3.7) in association with an interquartile range increase
(8.4°C) in Ta during the last trimester. Ta over the entire pregnancy
was positively associated with PT [odds ratio (OR) = 1.02; 95% CI:
1.00, 1.05] and LBW (OR = 1.04; 95% CI: 0.96, 1.13). Conclusions: Ta
during pregnancy was associated with lower birth weight and shorter
gestational age in our study population. Citation: Kloog I, Melly SJ,
Coull BA, Nordio F, Schwartz JD. 2015. Using satellite-based
spatiotemporal resolved air temperature exposure to study the
association between ambient air temperature and birth outcomes in
Massachusetts. Environ Health Perspect 123:1053--1058;  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1308075

Background The increase in temperatures over the last century and
continued increases in emissions of greenhouse gases have focused
attention on the effects of increasing heat (Crowley 2000). Relatively
few studies have examined associations between average daily ambient air
temperature during pregnancy (Ta) and pregnancy outcomes. Most published
work has focused on the relationship between preterm delivery (PT) and
Ta with variable results. One study reported an increased risk of very
low birth weight (LBW) delivery (birth weight < 1,500 g) with colder
ambient temperature (Hartig and Catalano 2013). Another study found no
association between preterm birth (birth at < 37 weeks completed
gestation) and a variety of factors including temperature, humidity, and
barometric pressure (Lee et al. 2008). In contrast, two studies have
reported that PT was associated with increased temperature and humidity
(Basu et al. 2010; Lajinian et al. 1997). A study conducted in Australia
reported that weekly temperature was positively associated with preterm
birth < 37 weeks and stillbirth < 36 weeks gestation (Strand et al.
2012). Schifano et al. (2013) reported that maximum apparent temperature
in the 2 days preceding delivery was associated with PT in

Rome, Italy, during the warm season; they used models adjusted for air
pollution, socioeconomic status, and mother's health. It is important to
determine whether ambient temperature indeed affects the length of
gestation and birth weight at delivery, because LBW delivery has
significant shortand long-term health implications. PT (delivery at
< 37 weeks gestation), early-term delivery (delivery at 37--38 weeks
gestation), and in utero growth restriction (IUGR; delivery at birth
weight < 10th percentile for gestational age) also contribute to
perinatal morbidity and mortality (Harding and Maritz 2012; McCormick
1985; Moster et al. 2008; Sengupta et al. 2013). Evidence suggests that
IUGR birth in particular may have longterm implications for childhood
and adult health (Bilbo and Schwarz 2009; Demicheva and Crispi 2014;
Gluckman and Hanson 2004; Harding and Maritz 2012; Sarr et al. 2012; Vos
et al. 2006). The pathogenesis of preterm, early-term, and IUGR delivery
is multifactorial. Inflammation, infection, and immune dysregulation may
cause preterm labor and early delivery; abnormalities of placental
formation and function may result in preterm, early-term, and IUGR
delivery due to placental bleeding, fetal distress, and preeclampsia;
and genetic variation and

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 123 | number 10 | October
2015

multiple gestation contribute to each of these etiologies (Gonçalves
et al. 2002; Han et al. 2011; Leber et al. 2010; Muglia and Katz 2010;
Saito et al. 2010; Wong and Grobman 2011). Social stressors have also
been studied as causes of preterm, early-term, and IUGR delivery, due to
variation in the rate of LBW delivery among different racial, ethnic,
and socioeconomic groups (Kuzawa and Thayer 2011; Wadhwa et al. 2011).
Environmental stressors such as changes in ambient air temperature may
also contribute to these birth outcomes. A recent study by Dadvand
et al. (2014) examined the association of term low birth weight with
residential proximity to major roads and surface temperature. They
showed that living within 200 m of major roads was associated with an
increase in term LBW risk [odds ration (OR) = 1.46; 95% confidence
interval (CI): 1.05, 2.04]. They also found that surface temperature was
associated with an increase in term LBW risk (OR = 1.18; 95% CI:
0.95, 1.45). The conflicting results published to date on relationship
of ambient air temperature to preterm and/or LBW delivery may be
attributable to variations in temperature measurement and modeling. Air
temperature stations have limited spatial coverage, particularly in less
urban areas, and airport monitors may not reflect the urban heat island
adequately. Because temperature can vary greatly both spatially and
temporally, the use of air temperature stations can introduce
considerable measurement error (and downward bias in the case of heat
islands), reducing their utility for epidemiological studies on the
health effects of extreme temperature and Address correspondence to
I. Kloog, Department of Geography and Environmental Development,
BenGurion University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva, Israel.
Telephone: 972-86428394. E-mail: ikloog@bgu.ac.il This study was funded
by the Harvard U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Particulate Matter
Clean Air Research Center (Harvard EPA PM CLARC) (grant R-834798), the
National Institute of Environmental Sciences/National Institutes of
Health (grant ES000002), and the following R21 climate grants: ES020695
and AG040027. The authors declare they have no actual or potential
competing financial interests. Received: 31 December 2013; Accepted:
2 April 2015; Advance Publication: 7 April 2015; Final Publication:
1 October 2015.

1053

Kloog et al.

climate change. Previous studies examining the association of preterm
and LBW delivery and Ta have typically used available monitors in the
study area. This introduces exposure error and likely biases the effect
estimates downward (Armstrong 1998; Zeger et al. 2000). Furthermore,
lack of spatially resolved daily Ta concentration data restricts these
studies to populations surrounding monitoring sites, which may not be
representative of the population as a whole. The lack of high-resolution
continuous spatiotemporal Ta data resulted in our group developing a
method to predict 24-hr mean Ta at a very fine spatial resolution (Kloog
et al. 2012a, 2014). Specifically, we developed new methodologies to
predict daily Ta, based on land use regression plus a daily calibration
of Ta ground measurements and MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer; http:// modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/data/) surface
temperature (Ts) over a large area with varying geographical
characteristics (covering the entire Northeast and Mid-Atlantic areas of
the United States) at a 1 × 1 km spatial resolution. We incorporated
land use and meteorological variables to predict daily 24-hr mean Ta for
grid cells even when satellite Ts measures were not available. A similar
model has previously been developed for PM2.5 on the same resolution
(Kloog et al. 2012c). We used our Ta prediction data to study
associations between Ta and live birth outcomes among singleton births
in Massachusetts during 2000--2008, including term birth weight, LBW
(< 2,500 g) among term births, preterm birth (< 37 weeks), and
gestational age.

Methods Study Domain and Population In the analysis we included the
entire state of Massachusetts (Figure 1). The study population included
all live singleton births > 22 weeks of gestation in Massachusetts from
1 January 2000 through 31 December 2008 (Figure 1). Birth data and the
latitude and longitude of each eligible address at birth were provided
by the Massachusetts Birth Registry (MBR; http://www.mass.
gov/eohhs/gov/departments/dph/programs/ admin/dmoa/vitals/). The term
birth weight and LBW (< 2,500 g) analyses included 453,658 births
≥ 37 weeks gestational age, and the gestational age and preterm birth
(< 37 weeks) analyses included 473,977 births. The study and the use of
birth data was approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
and the human subjects committee of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health. Informed consent was not required because we used
anonymous administrative data.

1054

Exposure Data For exposure data we used three different indicators:
predicted 1 × 1 km Ta from our model, ground Ta from the nearest
National Climatic Data Center (NCDC; http://www7.ncdc. noaa.gov/CDO/)
monitoring stations, and residence-specific cumulative traffic density.
We describe each metric in more detail below. Predicted air temperature.
Ta exposure data were generated by the previously mentioned Ta
prediction model (Kloog et al. 2014). In these prediction models we used
mixed models to first calibrate Ts and Ta measurements, regressing Ta
measurements against day-specific random intercepts, fixed and random Ts
slopes, and several spatial and temporal predictors [Normalized
Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), percent urban and elevation]. Then
to make use of the ability of neighboring cells to fill in the cells
with missing Ts values, we regressed the Ta predicted from the first
mixed-effects model against the mean of the Ta measurements on that day
from monitors within 60 km, separately for each grid cell. We used
10-fold of sample cross-validation (CV) to validate our predictions at
monitor locations at each step. We randomly divided our data into 90%
and 10% splits 10 times. We predicted for the 10% data sets using the
model fitted from the remaining 90% of the data. We then reported these
computed R2 values. To test our results for bias, we regressed the
measured Ta values against the predicted values in each site on each
day. We estimated the model prediction precision by taking the root mean
square prediction error (RMSPE). Mean out-ofsample R2 values for days
with and without Ts data were 0.947 and 0.940, respectively, indicating
excellent model performance. Mean out-of-sample temporal and spatial R2
values also were high (0.956 and 0.832, respectively) (Kloog et al.
2014). To estimate Ta exposure, we linked each mother's residence at the
time of delivery to its corresponding grid cell (Figure 2). Daily Ta

exposures were calculated for the day of birth; the day before birth;
moving average values for 3 days, 7 days, 14 days, 30 days, the last
trimester; and the entire pregnancy. PM2.5. Particulate matter ≤ 2.5 μm
(PM2.5) was estimated on a 1 × 1 km grid from the same MODIS satellite,
using daily measures of aerosol optical depth using a similar
methodology (daily calibration, land use, and meteorology) as the
temperature model. Further details have been published previously
(Chudnovsky et al. 2014; Kloog et al. 2012c). Because warm days are
often more polluted, PM2.5 was included as a covariate with the same
time periods used to classify Ta. Monitored air temperature. Daily data
for monitored Ta across Massachusetts were obtained from the NCDC. NCDC
is a government agency and has been collecting meteorological data for
close to a century. Ta is measured at a reference height of 2 m above
the ground in most weather stations (NCDC 2010). Cumulative traffic
density. Traffic emissions have been associated with birth outcomes in
many previous studies (Gryparis et al. 2009; Zeka et al. 2006).
Therefore, Massachusetts road data [average daily traffic (ADT)] were
obtained from the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT;
http://www.massdot.state.ma.us/) 2002 Road inventory. These data are
based on automatic vehicle counts on major highways, periodic counts on
other major roads, and estimated counts for all other roads (Kloog
et al. 2012b). Each 200 × 200 m grid was assigned a value for normalized
cumulative ADT (CADT) based on average daily traffic on all road
segments within 100 m of the center of each grid, where
CADT = Σ(ADT × road segment length). Each birth address was assigned the
average CADT value for the four grids with center points closest to the
address, using bilinear interpolation. On the basis of previous
literature on the potential risk factors associated with low birth
weight (Kloog et al. 2012b; Zeka et al. 2006, Air temperature monitor
stations Lakes and rivers Mother's residence Urban areas (within 30 km
of monitor) Rural areas (outside 30 km of monitor) A1 highways

Figure 1. Map of the study area showing the location of a sample subset
of mothers [randomly selected with the QGIS tool “random points”
(http://www.qgis.org/)], the location of the ground air monitoring
stations, and the areas within and outside 30 km of an air temperature
station (urban vs. rural areas).

volume

123 | number 10 | October 2015  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Air temperature, birth weight, and gestational age

2008), we included the following individual and contextual covariates:
Percent of open space. The percent of open space data was obtained from
the office of geographic information Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
information technology division MassGIS [Massachusetts Office of
Geographic Information Executiver Office for Administration and Finance
(MassGIS-EOEA) 2006]. The subset of the open space designated for
recreation and conservation was intersected with 2000 Census tract
boundaries (also downloaded from MassGIS) using ArcGIS© 10.1 (ESRI). The
percent of each census tract that was open space was then calculated and
assigned to birth addresses belonging to that tract. Socioeconomic
indicators. Socio­economic data at the individual level were obtained
from the Massachusetts birth registry. Information included the mother's
race/ethnicity [classified as Hispanic, non-Hispanic white, African
American, Asian, and other (all other ethnic groups)], mother's years of
education, and the Kotelchuck adequacy of prenatal care utilization
index (APNCU). The APNCU is based on the number and the time of start of
mother's prenatal visits (Alexander and Kotelchuck 1996) and was recoded
into inadequate (< 50% of expected visits used), intermediate (50--79%);
appropriate (80--109%), and appropriate plus (≥ 110%) categories. We
categorized education of the mother as no high school (< 9 years of
educational attainment), some high school (9--12 years of educational
attainment); some college (13--15 years); and college or postgraduate
(≥ 16 years). Median income. Data were obtained from the U.S. Census
Bureau 1999 median household income (U.S. Census Bureau 2000) for every
census tract in the study area, and assigned these to births with an
address located within that tract. Individual-level covariates. Maternal
age, parity, gestational age (calculated by the maternal recall of last
menstrual period), number of cigarettes smoked per day during and before
pregnancy, chronic conditions of mother or conditions of pregnancy (lung
disease, pregnancy-induced hypertension, gestational diabetes, and
nongestational diabetes, all modeled separately as single variables),
previous occurrence of a preterm birth, whether the mother ever had a
previous infant weighing ≥ 4,000 g, and sex of infant were all obtained
through the Massachusetts Birth Registry (Boston, MA) through the index
child's birth certificate.

time windows and term birth weight, and logistic mixed regression to
estimate associations with preterm birth (< 37 weeks) and LBW
(< 2,500 g) (Kloog et al. 2012b; Zeka et al. 2008). Seasonality was
controlled using sine and cosine terms with a period of 365.24 days.
Both sine and cosine were included to allow the regression to estimate
both the amplitude of the seasonal cycle and its phase. A random
intercept for census tract was used to capture unmeasured similarities
in persons residing in the same neighborhood. Specifically, we fit the
following models:

We estimated associations between Ta during different time windows and
gestational age using an accelerated failure time model (AFT). Such
models are a form of survival analysis that model the survival time
directly instead of the hazard. Gestational age is used as a continuous
outcome in the AFT model. The log-linear form of the AFT model with
respect to time (T) is given by

BWij = (α + uj) + β1Tai + β2PMi + γXi

-  eij (uj) ~ N[0,σu2] and\\
   [1]

where μ is the intercept, σ is a scale parameter, and εi is a random
variable, assumed to have a particular distribution. We adopted a gamma
distribution for εi, which can flexibly model a wide range of
distributions for the failure times (births). A two-sided p-value < 0.05
was considered statistically significant. We also ran analyses
stratified on subject residence < 30 km or ≥ 30 km of a Ta monitor (as
proxy indicators of urban and rural residences, respectively).
Statistical analyses were performed in SAS (version 9.3; SAS Institute
Inc., Cary, NC) and R (R Core Team 2014). Cases with missing data were
excluded from the analysis. An alpha level of 0.05 indicates statistical
significance.

Logit (PTij /LBWij = 1|X ) 

= (α + uj) + β1Tai + β2PMi + γXi + eij (uj) ~ N[0, σu2], [2] where BWij,
PTij, and LBWij represent birth weight, preterm, and LBW, respectively,
for the ith subject in census tract j; α and uj are the fixed and random
(tract-specific) intercepts, respectively; γXi denote the set of
variables included in the model, which include predicted ambient air
temperature, predicted ambient PM2.5, cumulative traffic density,
percent of open spaces, age of mother, median income, gestational age,
chronic conditions of mother or conditions of pregnancy (lung disease,
hypertension, gestational diabetes or nongestational diabetes), parity,
previous infant weighing ≥ 4,000 g and sex of infant, sine and cosine
(controlling for seasonality), APNCU (as a categorical variable),
mother's race (as a categorical variable), mother's education (as a
categorical variable), and previous preterm occurrences. eij is the
error 2 term and finally, σu is the variance of the tract random
effects, and ejj ~ N[0, σ2].

0

10

20

40 Kilometers

logTi = μ + α1X1i + α2X2i + ... + αp Xpi + σεi, [3]

Results Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1. Of the 450,407
births included in all births in our analyses, 50% of the births were
male, 72% were white, only 8% had maternal age < 20 years for full-term
births, and 21% of the mothers had > 15 years of education. Mean (± SD)
birth weight was 3,395 ± 502 g among term births and 3,391 ± 511 g among
all births. Table 2 contains a summary of the predicted Ta and traffic
exposure across all grid Mother's residence A1 highways Predicted air
temperature (°C) 6.98--8.23 8.24--8.63 8.64--8.94 8.95--9.18 9.19--9.38
9.39--9.57 9.58--9.75 9.76--9.91 9.92--10.05 10.06--10.19 10.20--10.32
10.33--10.45 10.46--10.58 10.59--10.71 10.72--10.84 10.85--10.98
10.99--11.14 11.15--11.31 11.32--11.88 11.89--14.46

Statistical Methods To identify factors affecting birth weight, we used
linear mixed regression models to estimate associations between both
monitor and modeled Ta during different

Figure 2. Map of the study area showing the residential location of a
subset of mothers over the daily predicted air temperature (°C) 1 × 1 km
grid averaged for the entire year of 2005.

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 123 | number 10 | October
2015

1055

Kloog et al.

almost all exposure windows showing statistical significance. We
observed a pattern of increasing impact of an IQR change in temperature
exposure with increasing averaging time up until the last trimester of
gestation average. The effect for the full pregnancy was smaller than
that of the last-trimester moving average. Term birth weights were
negatively associated with predicted Ta in almost all exposure

cells in the analysis. Table 3 presents the interquartile range (IQR)
for each time window used in the analysis. Table 4 presents the results
from the regression across all exposure periods tested for both the
predicted exposures and monitor exposure analyses. Using our spatially
and temporal resolved predicted Ta as exposure resulted in all exposure
windows showing decreased birth weights with increased Ta with

time windows (Table 4). In general, the average estimated difference in
term birth weight with an 8.4°C (IQR) increment in Ta increased as the
averaging time increased up to the last trimester before birth, whereas
associations were weaker for average exposure over the entire pregnancy.
For example, average term birth weight was 8.9 g lower (95% CI:
--16.2, --1.5) in association with a 9.0°C IQR

Table 1. Characteristics of live births in Massachusetts during the
9-year period 2000--2008 for both the full-term analysis and AFT models.
Term births Characteristic Overall Maternal race White African American
Hispanic Asian Other Maternal education (years) ≤8 > 8--12 13--15 ≥ 15
Maternal age (years) ≤ 20 20--29 30--34 35--39 > 39 Maternal chronic
conditions Gestational diabetes Nongestational diabetes Previous infant
≥ 4,000 g Hypertension Lung disease Previous preterm birth Gestational
age (weeks) APNCU 1 (inadequate) 2 (intermediate) 3 (appropriate) 4
(appropriate plus) Mean household Income (US$) Sex Male Female Parity
(number of births) Cigarettes per day during pregnancy (smokers)
Cigarettes per day before pregnancy (smokers) Cumulative traffic density
(average daily traffic counts) Elevation (m) Percent of open space
Season of birth Winter Spring Summer Fall

All births ≥ 22 weeks

Percent of all births (n) (450,407)

Mean birth weight ± SD (g) 3,395 ± 502

72 (323,819) 7 (33,775) 13 (60,339) 7 (31,491) 0.3 (983)

3,443 ± 496 3,257 ± 520 3,297 ± 496 3,234 ± 463 3,347 ± 505

3 (12,718) 34 (154,723) 42 (187,792) 21 (94,994)

3,293 ± 492 3,319 ± 511 3,407 ± 503 3,457 ± 485

5 (22,900) 33 (146,668) 32 (142,033) 24 (106,542) 7 (32,244)

3,219 ± 489 3,335 ± 518 3,427 ± 493 3,459 ± 518 3,434 ± 518

3 (15,047) 1 (3,128) 1 (3,503) 3 (12,721) 3 (14,535) 1 (4,331) (450,407)

3,419 ± 633 3,419 ± 633 3,936 ± 508 3,258 ± 567 3,295 ± 531 3,080 ± 576
39.0 ± 1.83

9 (40,427) 8 (35,519) 48 (215,188) 35 (159,273) (453,658)

3,309 ± 507 3,438 ± 476 3,465 ± 463 3,312 ± 539 52,313 ± 21,566

50 (226,589) 50 (223,818) (450,407) (450,407) (450,407) (450,407)
(450,407) (450,407)

3,452 ± 511 3,337 ± 486 2 ± 2.7 0.6 ± 2.7 1.8 ± 5.1 39.4 ± 23.5
59.9 ± 68.3 12.0 ± 11.1

22 (97,982) 26 (117,669) 27 (121,629) 25 (113,127)

3,379 ± 504 3,402 ± 502 3,399 ± 501 3,393 ± 500

Missing (n) 3,251 0

1,699

1

1,342 1,342 1,342 1,342 1,342 1,342 0 0

0 0 0 642 616 0 0 0 0

Percent of all births (n) (462,400)

Mean birth weight ± SD (g) 3,391 ± 511

72 (332,383) 8 (34,803) 13 (62,029) 7 (32,174) 0.3 (1,011)

3,440 ± 503 3,246 ± 540 3,313 ± 522 3,229 ± 473 3,339 ± 527

3 (13,121) 34 (159,307) 42 (192,246) 21 (97,726)

3,288 ± 501 3,313 ± 523 3,455 ± 491 3,403 ± 512

5 (23,618) 33 (150,538) 32 (145,720) 24 (109,365) 7 (33,159)

3,211 ± 505 3,330 ± 504 3,424 ± 500 3,455 ± 512 3,431 ± 530

3 (15,388) 1 (3,219) 1 (3,594) 3 (13,038) 3 (14,906) 1 (4,475) (462,400)

3,407 ± 562 3,411 ± 649 3,937 ± 511 3,253 ± 575 3,287 ± 547 3,070 ± 593
38.97 ± 1.95

9 (41,692) 8 (36,559) 48 (222,638) 35 (163,511) (462,400)

3,304 ± 518 3,438 ± 477 3,465 ± 465 3,304 ± 555 52,296 ± 21,573

50 (232,720) 50 (229,680) (462,400) (462,400) (462,400) (462,400)
(462,400) (462,400)

3,447 ± 521 3,334 ± 494 2 ± 2.7 0.7 ± 2.7 1.8 ± 5.1 39.2 ± 23.2
60 ± 68.4 12.0 ± 11.1

24 (108,896) 26 (118,182) 26 (121,917) 25 (113,405)

3,378 ± 514 3,399 ± 512 3,396 ± 510 3,390 ± 508

Missing (n) 3,381 0

1,748

1

1,420 1,420 1,420 1,420 1,420 1,420 0 0

0 0 0 656 631 0 0 0 0

Abbreviations: AFT, accelerated failure time; APNCU, Adequacy of
Prenatal Care Utilization index.

Table 2. Descriptive statistics for daily air temperature, daily PM2.5
exposure, and traffic density across mother's residences (397,698) in
Massachusetts between 2000 and 2008. Covariate Predicted air temperature
(°C) Cumulative traffic density (daily traffic × length) Predicted PM2.5
(μg/m3)

1056

Mean 11.3 1,309 10.9

Median 11.4 702 9.27

SD 5.6 2,076 5.9

Minimum --12.1 0 0.2

volume

Maximum 35.49 29,000 56.9

IQR 8.9 1,352 6.8

25th percentile 6.9 258 6.7

75th percentile 15.8 1,611 13.5

Days of data available 3,285 3,285 3,285

123 | number 10 | October 2015  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Air temperature, birth weight, and gestational age

increase in Ta during the 7 days before birth; 16.6 g lower (95% CI:
--27.4, --5.9) and 16.7 g lower (95% CI: --29.7, --3.7) for the 30 days
and last trimester before birth, respectively (IQR increase of 9.1°C and
8.4°C); and 5.0 g lower (95% CI: --7.8, --2.3) with an IQR increase of
2.7°C in average Ta over the entire pregnancy. The OR for low term birth
weight with a 2.7°C increase in model-based Ta over the entire pregnancy
was 1.04 (95% CI: 0.96, 1.13), compared with 1.07 (95% CI: 0.87, 1.27)
for monitor-based Ta (Table 5). The OR for preterm birth with a 2.7°C
increase in model-based Ta over the entire pregnancy was 1.04 (95% CI:
0.96, 1.13) compared with 1.02 (95% CI: 1.00, 1.05) for monitor-based
Ta. A 2.7°C increase in Ta over the entire pregnancy was associated with
a 0.26% decrease in gestational age (95% CI: --0.28, --0.25%), and an
8.4°C increase in Ta over the last trimester before birth was associated
with a 0.15% decrease in gestational age (95% CI: --0. 26, 0.05%)
(Table 5). For monitor-based Ta, the results were significant as well,
but showed an increase in gestational age: a 0.89% increase in
gestational age (95% CI: 0.88, 0.90%) for full-term birth and 0.37%
increase in gestational age (95% CI: 0.37, 0.38%) for the last
trimester. The association between an IQR increase in predicted Ta
during the entire pregnancy and birth weight was stronger among births
to mothers with residences in urban areas (< 30 km from a monitor, 8.1 g
lower; 95% CI: --12.2, --4.0) compared with births to mothers residing
in rural areas (> 30 km from a monitor, 4.2 g lower; 95% CI:
--8.4, 0.1), though the differences were not statistically significant
(interaction p-value = 0.26).

Discussion In the presented study, we estimated the associations of Ta
on birth outcomes in a study of singleton births in Massachusetts
counties between 2000 and 2008. Using a model enhanced with satellite
remote sensing, we were able to assign exposure to all subjects with
less spatial and temporal error (compared with using a closest-monitor
approach), regardless of the distance between a participant's residence
and the closest Ta monitor. Table 3. IQR (interquartile range) values
for each time window used in the study. Exposure period Day of birth One
day before birth Moving average of 3 days before birth Last week (7 days
before birth) Last 2 weeks (14 days before birth) Last month (30 days
before birth) Last trimester Entire pregnancy

IQR (°C) 8.9 8.9 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.1 8.4 2.7

We found a consistent negative association between Ta and birth weight
for infants who were born full term after adjusting for other potential
risk factors, such as previous and current mother's health conditions,
socio­ economic factors, and physical environment risk factors such as
traffic density in surrounding grid cells. The association with Ta over
the entire pregnancy was stronger in more urban areas (< 30 km from a
monitor) than in more rural areas (≥ 30 km from a monitor), though the
difference was not statistically significant. In contrast to the
associations found with our modeled predicted Ta, associations between
birth weight and Ta measured at the nearest ground monitor stations were
close to the null, suggesting that predicted Ta classified exposure more
accurately than monitor-based estimates. Interestingly, for the AFT
analysis we found that an increase in Ta over both periods were
associated with a decrease in gestational age; yet in the monitored Ta
analysis, these associations were significantly associated with an
increase of gestational age. These findings need to be further explored
in future studies. A key advantage of the presented study is the
exposure assignment. Because our model allows us to predict temporally
and spatially resolved Ta, we can assign daily Ta exposure to the entire
study population, avoiding potential selection bias that would yield a
nonrepresentative sample. It also captures the urban heat

island effect, as shown in Figure 2. In addition, we account for small
area measures of potential confounders at a 1 × 1 km spatial resolution
such as individual and census measures of socioeconomic status, and
medical history. The literature on the potential impact of Ta on birth
weight and its determinants is still very limited. Increased Ta may
affect birth weight through direct or indirect means. The causes of
preterm birth and LBW are largely unknown, but are likely to be a
complex mix of genetic, behavioral, socioeconomic, and environmental
factors (Strand et al. 2011). Heat stress during spells of high Ta has
been suspected as a cause of premature birth, resulting in high
prevalence of LBW (Basu et al. 2010). Pregnant women may be more
susceptible to changes in temperature because of the extra physical and
mental strain, and may be at a greater risk of heat stress because of
multiple factors, such as increased fat deposition; the ratio of surface
area to body mass, which decreases, reducing the capacity to lose heat
by sweating; weight gain, which increases heat production; and the fetus
adding to the maternal heat stress by adding its own body's composition
and its own metabolic rate (Wells and Cole 2002). Three studies have
reported positive associations between preterm birth and Ta (Flouris
et al. 2009; Lajinian et al. 1997; Yackerson et al. 2008), but two other
studies did not report an association (Lee et al. 2008; Porter et al.
1999).

Table 4. The adjusted association between a one interquartile range
increase in air temperature (°C) and PM2.5 and birth weight for
full-term births at various exposure periods (n = 453,658). Exposure
period Day of birth One day before birth Moving average of 3 days before
birth Last week (7 days before birth) Last 2 weeks (14 days before
birth) Last month (30 days before birth) Last trimester Entire pregnancy

Predicted air temperature (°C) β (95% CI) --3.6 (--8.1, 0.9) --4.4
(--9.6, 0.7) --4.1 (--9.8, 1.5) --8.9 (--16.2, --1.5) --15.5 (--24.2,
--6.8) --16.6 (--27.4, --5.9) --16.7 (--29.7, --3.7) --5.0 (--7.8,
--2.3)

Closest monitor temperature (°C) β (95% CI) 0.6 (--4.8, 6.0) 1.8 (--3.8,
7.5) 3.0 (--2.8, 8.8) 1.5 (--4.6, 7.7) 0.5 (--6.4, 7.3) 2.0 (--6.3,
10.2) --8.0 (--20.3, 4.3) 2.6 (--17.1, 22.4)

All models adjusted for predicted air temperature, predicted PM2.5,
cumulative traffic density, percent of open spaces, age of mother,
gestational age, chronic conditions of mother or conditions of pregnancy
(lung disease, hypertension, gestational diabetes, or nongestational
diabetes), parity, previous infant weighing ≥ 4,000 g and sex of infant,
sine and cosine (controlling for seasonality), APNCU (as a categorical
variable), mother's race (as a categorical variable), mother's education
(as a categorical variable), and previous preterm occurrences.

Table 5. Accelerated failure time model (AFT) results on the
relationship between gestational age and Ta (n = 473,977) and logistic
model results on preterm (n = 473,977) and low birth weight outcomes
(n = 453,658). Outcome and exposure time period AFT model (gestational
period) β (95% CI) Last trimester Entire pregnancy Preterm births (< 37
weeks) [OR (95% CI)] Entire pregnancy Low birth weight (< 2,500 g) [OR
(95% CI)] Entire pregnancy

Predicted air temperature (°C)

Closest monitor temperature (°C)

--0.0015 (--0.0026, 0.0005) --0.0026 (--0.0028, --0.0025)

0.0037 (0.0037, 0.0038) 0.0089 (0.0088, 0.0090)

1.02 (1.00, 1.05)

1.07 (0.87, 1.27)

1.04 (0.96, 1.13)

1.02 (0.45, 2.30)

All models adjusted for predicted air temperature, predicted PM2.5,
cumulative traffic density, percent of open spaces, age of mother,
chronic conditions of mother or conditions of pregnancy (lung disease,
hypertension, gestational diabetes or non-gestational diabetes), parity,
previous infant weighing ≥ 4,000 g and sex of infant, sine and cosine
(controlling for seasonality), APNCU (as a categorical variable),
mother's race (as a categorical variable), mother's education (as a
categorical variable), and previous preterm occurrences.

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 123 | number 10 | October
2015

1057

Kloog et al.

Race, ethnicity, education, and other socioeconomic status factors are
often clustered spatially and can act as potential confounders since
they do not vary by time but do vary by space. We use a random-effects
model with a random intercept for FIPS (Federal Information Processing
Standard) code while controlling for seasonality to reduce bias as well.
There are several limitations in the present study. First, the spatial
resolution of the exposures was 1 × 1 km. As satellite remote sensing
evolves and progresses, higher spatial resolution data should become
available in the coming years, which will further reduce exposure error.
Such increased resolution should enable us to more precisely estimate
daily intraurban exposures and how these vary across spatial locations.
Other limitations include the lack of some health and personallevel data
such as maternal weight, body mass index, differences across different
locations in physical activity, and pollen exposure. We also lacked data
on indoor temperature exposure and information on air conditioning use
in households. Finally, another limitation is the lack of information on
road noise as in some recent pregnancy outcome studies (Dadvand et al.
2014; Gehring et al. 2014). In summary, our findings suggest that higher
Ta during pregnancy may be a risk factor for lower birth weight.
References Alexander GR, Kotelchuck M. 1996. Quantifying the adequacy of
prenatal care: a comparison of indices. Public Health Rep 111:408--418.
Armstrong BG. 1998. Effect of measurement error on epidemiological
studies of environmental and occupational exposures. Occup Environ Med
55:651--656. Basu R, Malig B, Ostro B. 2010. High ambient temperature
and the risk of preterm delivery. Am  J Epidemiol 172:1108--1117;
doi:10.1093/aje/kwq170. Bilbo SD, Schwarz JM. 2009. Early-life
programming of later-life brain and behavior: a critical role for the
immune system. Front Behav Neurosci 3:14; doi:10.3389/neuro.08.014.2009.
Chudnovsky AA, Koutrakis P, Kloog I, Melly S, Nordio F, Lyapustin A,
et al. 2014. Fine particulate matter predictions using high resolution
Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) retrievals. Atmos Environ 89:189--198.
Crowley TJ. 2000. Causes of climate change over the past 1000 years.
Science 289:270--277. Dadvand P, Ostro B, Figueras F, Foraster M,
Basagaña X, Valentín A, et al. 2014. Residential proximity to major
roads and term low birth weight: the roles of air pollution, heat,
noise, and road-adjacent trees. Epidemiology 25:518--525. Demicheva E,
Crispi F. 2014. Long-term follow-up of intrauterine growth restriction:
cardiovascular disorders. Fetal Diagn Ther 36(2):143--153. Flouris AD,
Spiropoulos Y, Sakellariou GJ, Koutedakis Y. 2009. Effect of seasonal
programming on fetal development and longevity: links with environmental
temperature. Am J Hum Biol 21:214--216. Gehring U, Tamburic L, Sbihi H,
Davies HW, Brauer M.

1058

2014. Impact of noise and air pollution on pregnancy outcomes.
      Epidemiology 25:351--358. Gluckman PD, Hanson MA. 2004. Living
      with the past: evolution, development, and patterns of disease.
      Science 305:1733--1736; doi:10.1126/science.1095292. Gonçalves LF,
      Chaiworapongsa T, Romero R. 2002. Intrauterine infection and
      prematurity. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev 8:3--13;
      doi:10.1002/mrdd.10008. Gryparis A, Paciorek CJ, Zeka A, Schwartz
      J, Coull BA.
2015. Measurement error caused by spatial misalignment in environmental
      epidemiology. Biostatistics 10:258--274;
      doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxn033. Han CS, Schatz F, Lockwood CJ.
      2011. Abruptionassociated prematurity. Clin Perinatol 38:407--421.
      Harding R, Maritz G. 2012. Maternal and fetal origins of lung
      disease in adulthood. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 17:67--72. Hartig
      T, Catalano R. 2013. Cold summer weather, constrained restoration,
      and very low birth weight in Sweden. Health Place 22:68--74;
      doi:10.1016/j. healthplace.2013.03.008. Kloog I, Chudnovsky A,
      Koutrakis P, Schwartz J. 2012a. Temporal and spatial assessments
      of minimum air temperature using satellite surface temperature
      measurements in Massachusetts, USA. Sci Total Environ 432:85--92;
      doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.05.095. Kloog I, Melly SJ, Ridgway
      WL, Coull BA, Schwartz J. 2012b. Using new satellite based
      exposure methods to study the association between pregnancy PM2.5
      exposure, premature birth and birth weight in Massachusetts.
      Environ Health 11:40; doi:10.1186/1476-069X-11-40. Kloog I, Nordio
      F, Coull BA, Schwartz J. 2012c. Incorporating local land use
      regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model
      of spatiotemporal PM2.5 exposures in the Mid-Atlantic states.
      Environ Sci Technol 46:11913--11921. Kloog I, Nordio F, Coull BA,
      Schwartz J. 2014. Predicting spatiotemporal mean air temperature
      using MODIS satellite surface temperature measurements across the
      Northeastern USA. Remote Sens Environ 150:132--139. Kuzawa CW,
      Thayer ZM. 2011. Timescales of human adaptation: the role of
      epigenetic processes. Epigenomics 3:221--234;
      doi:10.2217/epi.11.11. Lajinian S, Hudson S, Applewhite L,
      Feldman  J, Minkoff  HL. 1997. An association between the
      heat-humidity index and preterm labor and delivery: a preliminary
      analysis. Am J Public Health 87:1205--1207;
      doi:10.2105/AJPH.87.7.1205. Leber A, Teles A, Zenclussen AC. 2010.
      Regulatory T cells and their role in pregnancy. Am J Reprod
      Immunol 63:445--459; doi:10.1111/j.1600-0897.2010.00821.x. Lee SJ,
      Hajat S, Steer PJ, Filippi V. 2008. A time-series analysis of any
      short-term effects of meteoro­ logical and air pollution factors
      on preterm births in London, UK. Environ Res 106:185--194;
      doi:10.1016/j. envres.2007.10.003. MassGIS-EOEA (Massachusetts
      Office of Geographic Information Executive Office for
      Administration and Finance). 2006. Office of Geographic
      Information (MassGIS). Available: http://www.mass.gov/anf/
      research-and-tech/it-serv-and-support/applicationserv/office-of-geographic-information-massgis/
      [accessed 19 October 2013]. McCormick M. 1985. The contribution of
      low birth weight to infant mortality and childhood morbidity.
      N Engl J Med 312:82--90. Moster D, Lie RT, Markestad T. 2008.
      Long-term medical and social consequences of preterm birth. N Engl
      J Med 359:262--273.

volume

Muglia LJ, Katz M. 2010. The enigma of spontaneous preterm birth. N Engl
J Med 362:529--535. NCDC (National Climatic Data Center). 2010. The
National Climatic Data Center Data Inventories. Available:
http://www7.ncdc.noaa.gov/CDO/ [accessed 9 October 2013]. Porter KR,
Thomas SD, Whitman S. 1999. The relation of gestation length to
short-term heat stress. Am J Public Health 89:1090--1092. R Core Team.
2014. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna,
Austria:R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Available:
http://www.Rproject.org [accessed 9 October 2013]. Saito S, Nakashima A,
Shima T, Ito M. 2010. Th1/ Th2/Th17 and regulatory T-cell paradigm in
pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol 63:601--610;
doi:10.1111/j.1600-0897.2010.00852.x. Sarr O, Yang K, Regnault TR. 2012.
In utero programming of later adiposity: the role of fetal growth
restriction. J Pregnancy 2012:134758; doi:10.1155/2012/134758. Schifano
P, Lallo A, Asta F, De Sario M, Davoli M, Michelozzi P. 2013. Effect of
ambient temperature and air pollutants on the risk of preterm birth,
Rome 2001--2010. Environ Int 61:77--87. Sengupta S, Carrion V, Shelton
J, Wynn RJ, Ryan RM, Singhal K, et al. 2013. Adverse neonatal outcomes
associated with early-term birth. JAMA Pediatr 167(11):1053--1059.
Strand LB, Barnett AG, Tong S. 2011. The influence of season and ambient
temperature on birth outcomes: a review of the epidemiological
literature. Environ Res 111:451--462. Strand LB, Barnett AG, Tong S.
2012. Maternal exposure to ambient temperature and the risks of preterm
birth and stillbirth in Brisbane, Australia. Am J Epidemiol 175:99--107;
doi:10.1093/aje/kwr404. U.S. Census Bureau. 2000. United States Census
Bureau of 2000. Factfinder. Available: http://factfinder.
census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml [accessed 21 August 2015].
Vos LE, Oren A, Bots ML, Gorissen WH, Grobbee DE, Uiterwaal  CS. 2006.
Birth size and coronary heart disease risk score in young adulthood. The
Atherosclerosis Risk in Young Adults (ARYA) study. Eur J Epidemiol
21:33--38. Wadhwa PD, Entringer S, Buss C, Lu MC. 2011. The contribution
of maternal stress to preterm birth: issues and considerations. Clin
Perinatol 38:351--384. Wells JCK, Cole TJ. 2002. Birth weight and
environmental heat load: a between-population analysis. Am J Phys
Anthropol 119:276--282; doi:10.1002/ajpa.10137. Wong AE, Grobman WA.
2011. Medically indicated--- iatrogenic prematurity. Clin Perinatol
38:423--439. Yackerson N, Piura B, Sheiner E. 2008. The influence of
meteorological factors on the emergence of preterm delivery and preterm
premature rupture of membrane. J Perinatol 28:707--711. Zeger SL, Thomas
D, Dominici F, Samet JM, Schwartz J, Dockery D, et al. 2000. Exposure
measurement error in time-series studies of air pollution: concepts and
consequences. Environ Health Perspect 108:419--426. Zeka A, Melly S,
Schwartz J. 2008. The effects of socioeconomic status and indices of
physical environment on reduced birth weight and preterm births in
Eastern Massachusetts. Environ Health 7:60; doi:10.1186/1476-069X-7-60.
Zeka A, Schwartz J, Melly S. 2006. Traffic-related and socioeconomic
indicators in association with low birth weight and preterm births in
eastern Massachusetts between 1996 and 2002 [Abstract]. Epidemiology
17(6):S105.

123 | number 10 | October 2015  •  Environmental Health Perspectives


