Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Atmospheric Environment journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/atmosenv

Assessing temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for
epidemiological studies using satellite aerosol optical depth
measurements Itai Klooga, *, Petros Koutrakisa, Brent A. Coullb, Hyung
Joo Leea, Joel Schwartza a b

Department of Environmental Health e Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Dr
West, Boston, MA 02215, USA Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School
of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history: Received 15 June 2011 Received in revised form 26
August 2011 Accepted 29 August 2011

Land use regression (LUR) models provide good estimates of spatially
resolved long-term exposures, but are poor at capturing short term
exposures. Satellite-derived Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) measurements
have the potential to provide spatio-temporally resolved predictions of
both long and short term exposures, but previous studies have generally
showed relatively low predictive power. Our objective was to extend our
previous work on day-speciﬁc calibrations of AOD data using ground PM2.5
measurements by incorporating commonly used LUR variables and
meteorological variables, thus beneﬁting from both the spatial
resolution from the LUR models and the spatio-temporal resolution from
the satellite models. Later we use spatial smoothing to predict PM2.5
concentrations for day/locations with missing AOD measures. We used
mixed models with random slopes for day to calibrate AOD data for
2000e2008 across New-England with monitored PM2.5 measurements. We then
used a generalized additive mixed model with spatial smoothing to
estimate PM2.5 in locationeday pairs with missing AOD, using regional
measured PM2.5, AOD values in neighboring cells, and land use. Finally,
local (100 m) land use terms were used to model the difference between
grid cell prediction and monitored value to capture very local trafﬁc
particles. Out-of-sample ten-fold cross-validation was used to quantify
the accuracy of our predictions. For days with available AOD data we
found high out-of-sample R2 (mean out-of-sample R2 ¼ 0.830, year to year
variation 0.725e0.904). For days without AOD values, our model
performance was also excellent (mean out-of-sample R2 ¼ 0.810, year to
year variation 0.692e0.887). Importantly, these R2 are for daily, rather
than monthly or yearly, values. Our model allows one to assess short
term and long-term human exposures in order to investigate both the
acute and chronic effects of ambient particles, respectively. Ó 2011
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Air pollution Aerosol optical depth Epidemiology PM2.5
Exposure error

1. Introduction Particular matter (PM), or aerosols, is the general term
   used for a mixture of solid particles and liquid droplets found in
   the atmosphere emanating from either natural (dust and volcanic ash)
   or anthropogenic aerosols (biomass burning smoke, industrial
   pollution) (Kaufman et al., 2002). A large body of literature has
   demonstrated the association between both short- and long-term
   exposures to ambient PM and adverse health effects. These effects
   include asthma (Lin et al., 2002), cardiovascular problems (Barnett
   et al., 2006; Le Tertre et al., 2002; Peters et al., 2001b; Schwartz
   and Morris, 1995; Wellenius et al., 2005; Zanobetti et al., 2000),
   respiratory infections (Baccarelli, 2009; Dominici

-  Corresponding author. E-mail address: ekloog@hsph.harvard.edu (I.
   Kloog). 1352-2310/$ e see front matter Ó 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All
   rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2011.08.066

et al., 2006; Katsouyanni et al., 1996; Schwartz, 1996; Sunyer and
Basagana, 2001; Zanobetti et al., 2009), lung cancer and mortality
(Dockery et al., 1993; Franklin et al., 2006; Pope et al., 2002;
Schwartz, 1994). This association with ambient PM remains even after
matching on other air pollutants and temperature in caseecrossover
analyses. However, most time series studies rely on a limited number of
PM2.5 monitors in their study regions, which introduces exposure error,
and likely biases the effect estimates downward (Zeger et al., 2000),
and are unable to produce estimates in locations without monitoring.
Cohort studies that estimate the effects of air pollution on, for
example, survival using nearest monitor as the exposure metric also
suffer from exposure error (Laden et al., 2006; Pope et al., 1995;
Miller et al., 2007; Peters et al., 2001a). Spatial interpolation/
modeling methods (Maheswaran et al., 2005) can also be problematic due
to limited data availability. The error for monitor-based studies can be
substantial, with, for example, some subjects in the

6268

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275

American Cancer Society (ACS) study residing more than 100 miles away
from the monitor. A study that examined the effect of restricting the
analysis of the ACS cohort to only subjects residing in the same county
as the sulfate monitor found that the coefﬁcient of long-term sulfate
exposure doubled compared to the original study (Willis et al., 2003).
More recently, Ostro and coworkers reported results from the California
Teachers Cohort, and compared results matching people to monitors within
8 km to results matching people to monitors within 30 km. The slopes for
sulfate also doubled when closer exposure was used (Ostro et al., 2006).
Simple kriging methods can produce more spatially resolved exposure, but
fail to account for local emission sources, such as the presence of
highways or stationary sources between two monitoring stations rendering
such interpolation inappropriate. Exposure metrics from such studies
thus ignore intra-urban variation in exposure and may be missing data in
rural areas. Land use (LU) regression models can do much better at
capturing long-term differences in exposure between locations; however,
since the LU terms are generally not time varying, their temporal
resolution tends to be limited, and based on the sparse PM2.5 monitoring
network (Aguilera et al., 2007; Briggs et al., 2000; Gryparis et al.,
2009; Liu et al., 2007; Ryan et al., 2008; Yanosky et al., 2009). Hence,
they can only assess long-term exposures which are adequate for chronic
health effects studies, but not acute ones. Moreover, lack of monitors
in exurban and rural locations, small towns, etc means participants from
such locations are either excluded, or are assigned estimates from the
LU regression that may have more error. And because of the siting
strategies for monitors and their modest number, certain exposure
scenarios may be under or unrepresented in calibrating the land use
regression. Due to its large spatial coverage and reliable repeated
measurements, satellite remote sensing, provides another important tool
for monitoring aerosols, particularly for areas and exposure scenarios
where surface PM2.5 monitors are not available (Engel-Cox et al., 2004;
Gupta et al., 2006; Koelemeijer et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2004). One
important and common aerosol parameter retrieved from satellite sensors
is the aerosol optical depth (AOD), which measures the light extinction
by aerosol scattering and absorption in the atmospheric column. AOD is a
function of the aerosol mass concentration, mass extinction efﬁciency,
hygroscopic growth factor (a function of relative humidity), and
effective scale height that is mainly determined by the vertical
distribution of aerosols (Kaufman and Fraser, 1983). In principle, such
data can yield an estimate of PM2.5 concentrations at any location.
Multiple studies published over the last decade have established
quantitative relationships between satellite-derived AOD and PM2.5.
These studies used various statistical methods from linear regression
models (Chu et al., 2002; Hutchison, 2003; Schäfer et al., 2008) to more
complex mixed models and generalized additive mixed models (GAM) (Liu et
al., 2009; Paciorek et al., 2008). However, these generally report low
to moderate predictive power, or lack detailed high resolution
predictions across large space-time domains. In a previous paper, we
showed that day-speciﬁc calibrations of AOD data using ground PM2.5
measurements from a spatial monitoring network greatly improves the
ability of AOD values to predict PM2.5 across Massachusetts (Lee et al.,
2011). An important limitation of using AOD data is that grid-speciﬁc
values are missing on some days, mostly due to cloud or snow cover. In
addition, AOD produces predictions for grid cells- not addresses, which
may be sufﬁcient for small area health studies, but results in less
accuracy when individual addresses are available. In this paper we
extend our previous work to incorporate LU regression and meteorological
variables to predict PM2.5 concentrations for days when AOD measures are
not available, and to

provide the address speciﬁc predictions of LU regression. Speciﬁcally,
we developed and validated models to predict daily PM2.5 at a 10  10 km
resolution and at local addresses across New-England region for the
years 2000e2008. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Study domain The spatial
domain of our study included the New-England region comprising the
states of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island
and Vermont (Fig. 1). 2.2. AOD data The Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) is a relatively new instrument aboard the
Earth Observing System (EOS) satellites (King et al., 1992; Salomonson
et al., 1989). The MODIS sensors are located on polar orbiting and
sun-synchronous Terra and Aqua satellites. The Terra satellite was
launched on the December 18, 1999 while the Aqua satellite was launched
on the May 4, 2002. For Terra, the local equatorial crossing time is
approximately 10:30 A.M. while for Aqua it is 13:30 P.M. Both satellites
perform measurements in the visible to thermal infrared spectrum region.
One of the fundamental aerosol products from MODIS is spectral AOD (also
known as Aerosol Optical ThicknessAOT). MODIS level 2 ﬁles are produced
daily, and represent the ﬁrst level of MODIS aerosol retrieval. Bands 1
through 7 are devised to study aerosols, and a number of other bands
help with cloud rejection and other screening procedures. The aerosol
algorithm relies on calibrated, geo-located reﬂectance Level 1B data
(Salomonson et al., 1989). More details about MODIS satellite data have
been reported (Levy et al., 2007; Remer et al., 2005). Daily data are
freely available online through the NASA website (NASA, 2010). For the
analysis presented here daily MODIS level 2 ﬁles from the Terra
satellite for the years 2000e2008 were used at the spatial resolution of
a 10 km  10 km at nadir. MODIS AOD pixel centroids

Fig. 1. Map of the study area showing the full AOD grid and all PM2.5
monitor station across New-England.

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275

constantly shift daily between orbits, thus we created a ﬁxed 10  10 km
grid. Daily values of AOD were assigned to the grid cell where the AOD
reading fell. Aqua satellite data was not used due to missing data
between the years 2000e2002. Although there are other satellites that
measure AOD, the MODIS satellite was used since it is the most validated
(using AERONET), accessible and accurate dataset available today (Remer
et al., 2005). 2.3. Monitoring data Data for daily PM2.5 mass
concentrations across the New-England region (see Fig. 1) for the years
2000e2008 were obtained from the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) Air Quality System (AQS) database as well as the IMPROVE
(Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments) network.
IMPROVE monitor sites are located in national parks and wilderness areas
while EPA monitoring sites are located across New-England including
urban areas such as downtown Boston. There were 78 monitors with unique
locations operating in New-England during the study period. The Mean
PM2.5 Across New-England during the study period was 11.25 mg m3 with a
standard deviation of 7.77 mg m3 and 8.4 mg m3 IQR.

6269

stations). Grid cells were matched to the closest weather station for
meteorological variables. 2.4.5. PM2.5 point emissions PM2.5 point
emissions were obtained through the 2005 USEPA National Emissions
Inventory (NEI) facility emissions report (EPA, 2010). Because the
distributions of point source emissions were highly right-skewed, they
were log transformed. Locations reporting zero emissions within the
appropriate grid were assigned a value of one half of the minimum value
among all monitoring locations. Out of the 78 monitors used in the
analysis 15 were within 100 m of an industrial source, 27 were within
500 m and 37 within 1 km. 2.4.6. Area-source PM2.5 emissions Area-source
PM2.5 emissions data were obtained through the 2005 USEPAeNEI tiered
emissions reports (EPA, 2010), which provide estimates of total
area-source emissions of PM2.5 by county and year. Intersecting source
emission areas for each 10  10 km grid were weight averaged and
similarly log transformed. 2.5. Statistical methods

2.4. Spatial predictors of PM2.5 Multiple potential predictors were
examined for the 10 km  10 km grid: Percent of open spaces, Population
density, Relative humidity, Height of the planetary boundary layer,
Elevation, trafﬁc density, length of A1 (major) roads, PM2.5 point
emissions, Area-source PM2.5 emissions, Temperature, Absolute humidity,
Wind speed and Visibility. Since we were interested in predictive
accuracy, not statistical signiﬁcance, only the following variables were
included based on the AIC score (Akaike information criterion e a
measure of the relative goodness of ﬁt) of the models tested: 2.4.1.
Percent of open spaces Percent of open spaces data were obtained through
the 2001 national land cover data (NLCD) multi-resolution land
characteristics consortium (MRLC) (Homer et al., 2004). Data were
obtained as raster ﬁles with 30 m cell size. Percent of open space
included all areas such as parks, forestry, golf courses, and vegetation
planted in developed settings for recreation, erosion control, or
aesthetic purposes. 2.4.2. Elevation Elevation data were obtained
through the national elevation dataset (NED) (Maune, 2007). NED is the
distributed by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and provides seamless
raster elevation data of the conterminous United States. The NED is
released in geographic coordinates at a resolution of 1 arc sec. 2.4.3.
Major roads Road data were obtained through the US census 2000
topologically integrated geographic encoding and referencing system
(TIGER), (TIGER, 2006). We calculated A1 road length (class 1 roads that
are hard surface highways including Interstate and U.S. numbered
highways, primary State routes, and all controlled access highways)
across New-England. The A1 roads were intersected with the 10x10 grid
cell and the resulting attribute tables contained the sum of all A1 road
segment lengths in the 10 km grid. 2.4.4. Metrologic data All
meteorological variables used in the analysis (temperature, wind speed,
visibility) were obtained through the national climatic data center
(NCDC) (NCDC, 2010). Only continuous operating stations with daily data
running from 2000 to 2008 were used (28

Though the calibration between AOD and PM2.5 varies little spatially on
a single day, as noted in Lee et al. (Lee et al., 2011), the key reason
for the poor performance of previous AOD-based prediction models is that
the relationship between AOD and PM2.5does vary day to day, due to
differences in mixing height, relative humidity, particle composition,
vertical proﬁles etc. Our model design was set from the onset to
accommodate the two most common data types in health studies: small area
(census areas, postal code areas etc.) geocoded data (SAGD) and
residence geocoded data (RGD). When using SAGD we make use of our base
grid cell model while when RGD are available, to improve local
predictions, we incorporate local land use variables. The Lee paper
showed that daily calibration of AOD values greatly improves model
performance. Hence to estimate PM2.5 concentrations in each grid cell on
each day we ﬁrst calibrated the AODePM2.5 relationship for each day
using grid cells with both monitors and AOD values (stage 1, see Fig.
2). To accommodate studies using RGD, we take the residuals of the grid
cell model in each monitoring site and regress them against local (w100
m buffer) LU terms at each monitor to estimate the incremental
contribution of local (mostly trafﬁc) pollution at each monitoring site.
This base stage 1 model (the grid model without the local land use
terms) was then used to predict PM2.5 concentrations in grid cells
without monitors but with available AOD measurements (stage 2). Since
AOD values are often missing due to cloud cover, high surface reﬂectance
above bright and urban areas (e.g., snow cover), or retrieval errors
(e.g., misclassiﬁcation of clouds by the screening algorithm) (see Fig.
3), the stage 2 model fails to provide predictions for many grid
celleday combinations. To estimate PM2.5 concentrations in cells where
no AOD data are available for that speciﬁc day, we ﬁt a third model that
takes advantage of the association of grid cells AOD values with PM2.5
monitoring located elsewhere, and the association with available AOD
values in neighboring grid cells (stage 3). Finally, again to
accommodate studies using RGD, we take the residuals of the stage 3
model in each monitoring site and regress them against local (w100 m
buffer) LU terms at each monitor. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst a mixed model
regression with day-speciﬁc random intercepts, AOD slopes, and
temperature slopes was performed separately (stage 1) for each year
(2000e2008). In particular we ﬁt the model:

6270

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275

We start by calibrating the AOD-PM2.5 relationship for each day (stage
1)

We use the stage 1 model to predict PM2.5 concentrations in grid cells
without monitors but with available AOD measurements (stage 2).

We estimate PM2.5 concentrations in cells where no AOD data available
using the stage 2 model (taking advantage of the association of grid
cells AOD values with PM2.5 monitoring located elsewhere, and the
association with available AOD values in neighboring grid cells) (stage
3)

Fig. 2. Model framework illustrating the three model steps.

PMij ¼ (a þ uj) þ (b1 þ vj) AODij þ (b2 þ kj) Temperatureij þ b3Wind
Speedij þ b4Visibiltyij þ b5Elevationi þ b6Major Roadsi þ b7Open Spacei
þ b8Point Emissionsi þb9Area Emissionsi þ 3ij (ujvjkj)w[(o o o), S]
Where: PMij is the measured PM2.5 concentration at a spatial site i on a
day j; a and uj are the ﬁxed and random (site speciﬁc) intercepts,
respectively, AODij is the AOD value in the grid cell corresponding to
site i on a day j; b1 and vj are the ﬁxed and random slopes,
respectively. Temperatureij, Wind Speedij and Visibilityij are the
values in the grid cells corresponding to site i on a day j (b2 and kj
are the ﬁxed and random slopes for temperature). Elevationi, Major
roadsi, Open Spacei, Point Emissionsi and Area Emissionsi are the means
in grid cells corresponding to site i. Finally, S is an unstructured
varianceecovariance matrix for the random effects. To validate our
model, the dataset was repeatedly randomly divided into 90% and 10%
splits. Predictions for the held-out 10% of the data were made from the
model ﬁt of the remaining 90% of the data. This “out-of-sample” process
was repeated ten times and cross-validated (CV) R2 values were computed.
To check for bias we regressed the measured PM2.5 values against the
predicted values in each site on each day. Overall temporal R2 was
calculated by regressing Delta PM against Delta predicted where: Delta
PM is the difference between the actual PM2.5 in place i at time t and
the annual mean PM2.5 at that location, and Delta predicted is deﬁned
similarly for the predicted values generated from the model. Overall
spatial R2 was calculated by regressing the annual mean PM2.5 at place i
against the annual mean predicted PM2.5 at place i. We also tested how
the performance of our models was improved by using AOD compared to
models using spatial smoothing of monitored values (kriging), using LU
terms, using

metrological terms or using both LU and metrological terms. Tenfolds
out-of-sample CV was performed for a test year (2001) and repeated for
each model type tested: LU only (only land use variables were regressed
against PM2.5), kriging, metrological only (only met variables were
regressed against PM2.5), LU and metrological combined, AOD (only AOD
was regressed against PM2.5) versus our stage 1 model to get both a
temporal R2 and spatial R2 for each speciﬁc model. One major limitation
of kriging PM2.5 monitors is that many of them operate only 1 day in 3.
As a result the number of observations on a given day is small compared
to the number of degrees of freedom needed to ﬁt a spatial surface for
PM2.5 (this is in contrast to the calibration of AOD with PM2.5, which
only needs one degree of freedom per day (the slope for that day)). To
gain enough power, we ﬁt a separate spatial surface for each month
rather than each day. Additionally, we explored the model ﬁtness by
season e cold season (winter months) versus warm season (summer months),
and by population density (above and below the New-England population
density mean). In the next stage (stage 2), we used the stage 1 model ﬁt
to predict PM2.5 in grid cells where AOD data is available but PM
monitoring data is not. In stage 3, we estimated daily PM2.5
concentration levels for all grid cells in the study domain for days
when AOD data were unavailable by using the stage 2 data. To capture the
ability of neighboring cells to ﬁll in the cells with missing AOD
values, we ﬁt a model with a smooth function of latitude and longitude
and a random intercept for each cell. This is similar to universal
kriging, however we extended that approach by including the mean of the
PM2.5 monitors on that day (the average PM2.5 concentrations measured at
all the available PM2.5 monitors on each day) and random cell-speciﬁc
slope. To allow for temporal variations in the spatial correlation, a
separate spatial surface was ﬁt for each two-month period of each year.
Using this method provides additional information about the
concentration in the missing grid cells that simple kriging would not.
All modeling was done in R statistical software: PredPMij ¼ (a þ ui) þ
(b1 þ vi) MPMj þ Smooth (X,Y)k(j) þ Bimon þ 3ij (uj vi) w [(o o), Ub]
Where: PredPMij is the predicted PM2.5 concentration at a spatial site i
on a day j from the ﬁrst prediction model; MPMj is the mean PM across
the New-England region on a day j; a and ui are the ﬁxed and random
intercepts, respectively; b1 and vi are the ﬁxed and random slopes,
respectively. The smooth X,Y is a thin plate spline ﬁt to the latitude
and longitude, which is similar to kriging, but allows greater spatial
anisotrophy, k(j) denotes the two-month period in which day j falls
(that is, a separate spatial smooth was ﬁt for each two-month period),
and Bimon is an indicator for each two-month period. Using this ﬁnal
model, we again performed cross-validation to estimate the goodness of
ﬁt. Land use terms were tested in this model and incorporated if
signiﬁcant. For the residual part we regressed (again in R statistical
software) the residuals for each monitor against the local LU speciﬁc
for each monitor and a smooth function of trafﬁc density: ResidPMi ¼ a þ
l (b1Traﬁc Densityi) þ b2Elevationi þ b3Population Densityi þ b4Percent
Urbani þ 3i Where: ResidPMi is the residuals at a spatial monitor site
i; lb1 denote a penalized spline for trafﬁc density, b2eb4 denote the
set of covariates of interest used in the model and ei is the error. In
contrast to stage 1, where land use terms were grid cell averages, for
this model land use terms were all computed for a 100 m radius about the
monitor, to capture local effects.

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275

6271

Fig. 3. Map of the study area showing a sample day with available AOD
data (02.08.2002) and all PM2.5 monitor station across New-England.

3. Results Fig. 4 presents a scatter plot of the AODePM2.5 relationship
   before (Fig. 4a) and after (Fig. 4b) the stage 1 calibration showing
   the signiﬁcant ﬁt improvement gained by calibrating with our stage 1
   model. Fig. 5 presents a density plot exhibiting the daily variation
   of AOD slopes between 2000 and 2008 during the stage 1 calibrations,
   and shows there is considerable day to day variability in slope. The
   ﬁrst stage models all had very high out-of-sample ﬁts for each year
   and the entire study period, with a mean out-of-sample R2 of 0.830
   (year to year variation 0.725e0.904), and as expected a highly
   signiﬁcant association between PM2.5 and the main explanatory
   variable-AOD (Table 1). We found no bias in our cross-validation
   results (Slope of observed versus predicted ¼ 0.969e0.983). The
   spatial and temporal out-of-sample results also presented very high
   ﬁts (Table 1): For the temporal model the mean out-of-sample R2 was
   0.840 (year to year variation 0.729e0.908) and for the spatial model
   the mean out-of-sample R2 was 0.782 (year to year variation
   0.690e0.859). Table 2 presents mean out-of-sample R2 for 2001 for
   seven different models: the land use (LU) model, LU þ MET model, AOD
   þ MET model, AOD þ LU model, AOD model, the kriging model, and our
   ﬁnal model (LU þ MET þ AOD). As Table 2 shows, using standard LU
   regression models (LU, LU þ MET etc.) with a random intercept by date
   does provide decent temporal and

Fig. 4. A scatter map of the AODePM relationship before and after the
calibration.

6272

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275 Table 2
Prediction accuracy: Ten-fold cross-validated R2 (for 2001) for Land use
(LU), daily Metrology (MET), Kriging (KRIG) and daily AOD models. Type

Model

ALL AOD þ MET AOD þ LU AOD MET þ LU LU KRIG

Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed Mixed

Temporal R2 ***

Spatial R2 0.78*/ 0.56/* 0.61*/ 0.43/* 0.60*/ 0.53/* 0.53***

0.84 0.81*/ 0.80/* 0.79*/ 0.80/* 0.76***

Note: /indicates a 0.1 signiﬁcance level; *indicates a 0.05 signiﬁcance
level; */ indicates a 0.01 signiﬁcance level. Fig. 5. A density plot
exhibiting the daily variation of AOD slopes by time between 2000e2008.

spatial R2, yet by using all variables together with AOD in a mixed
model regression, the prediction accuracy improves both temporally and
spatially i (R2 ¼ 0.837 temporally, R2 ¼ 0.790 spatially), indicating
that the AOD measurements do improve model ﬁt. The kriging model
resulted in a much lower R2 compared to the spatial R2 of our combined
model (0.53 versus 0.79 respectively). The cross-validation analysis by
season and population density exhibited modest variations by season and
population density that were expected: the 2000e2008 mean R2 for the
cold season was 0.728 versus 0.844 for the warm season and 0.803 for the
low population density areas versus 0.837 for the high population
density areas. The full yearly tables are not reported due to space
constraints. The stage 3 models also performed well, as shown in Table
3. All models performed well with a mean out-of-sample R2 of 0.810 (year
to year variation 0.692e0.887), which is relatively high considering
that these were days with neither ground PM data nor satellite AOD data
in the grid cells being predicted. Fig. 6 shows the spatial pattern of
predicted PM2.5 concentrations from the AOD models, averaged over the
entire study period. Mean predicted PM2.5 concentrations range from 6.21
mg m3 to 11.67 mg m3. As expected, predicted PM2.5 concentrations are
higher in urban areas such as Boston, Massachusetts compared to rural
areas such as Maine and Vermont. Increased concentrations along major
interstate highways are also clear. 4. Discussion In this paper we
examined the relationship between PM2.5 ground measurements and MODIS
AOD data in New-England during the period 2000e2008. One key ﬁnding of
this study is that our novel prediction models perform signiﬁcantly
better than previous prediction models which assumed that the
relationship between PM2.5 and MODIS AOD data remains constant over
time, Table 1 Prediction accuracy: Ten-fold cross-validated R2 for
yearly PM2.5 prediction models (2000e2008).

and better than LU regression alone. Another major key feature of our
combination of LU regression with AOD data is the ability to produce
PM2.5 estimates on a daily basis. The use of daily measurements of AOD
allows better assessment of space-time interactions than models that
only have spatially resolved time invariant LU terms, since we have
actual daily spatial measurements that can show differences in short
term particle concentrations between grid cells. This will allow us to
use the model to make predictions for studies of the acute effects
(short term) of air pollution as well as chronic (long-term) effects, as
well as for studies that attempt to capture both effects. As shown in
our analysis, AOD can be reliably used to predict PM2.5 if modeled
appropriately. Another interesting point worth mentioning is that by
using our stage 4 model, we can separate the regional/urban and local PM
sources. We make use of local land use data and regress that against the
residuals from our ﬁnal model prediction. This allows us to separate
PM2.5 coming from local trafﬁc sources and other PM2.5 sources from
transported PM and area PM. Since we are modeling the residuals there is
no auto-correlation issues that may arise between these two measures,
which will allow epidemiology studies to better discriminate between
them. According to Zeger and colleagues (Zeger et al., 2000), there are
three types of exposure measurement error in longitudinal studies of air
pollution and health. The ﬁrst error is derived from the difference
between the daily personal exposures of each individual and the daily
community average personal exposure. The second error stems from the
difference between the daily community average personal exposure and the
true ambient concentration. Finally, the third component of error is due
the difference between the measured and the true ambient concentration
(measurement error). We anticipate that our method using satellite data
to estimate individual level exposures removes much of the second
exposure error type in this classiﬁcation, since we are now able to
assign a more accurate community average as opposed to traditional
methods using a central monitor site often far away from the studied
community. In addition the result of the stage 4 model does Table 3
Prediction accuracy: Ten-folds cross-validated R2 for yearly GAMM PM2.5
prediction models (2000e2008).

Yearly dataset

Overall R2

Spatial R2

Temporal R2

Yearly dataset

Overall R2-GAMM

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Mean 2000e2008

0.725*/ 0.838/* 0.846*/ 0.850/* 0.852*/ 0.835/* 0.855*/ 0.904/* 0.814***
0.830

0.691*/ 0.689/* 0.849*/ 0.849/* 0.628*/ 0.860/* 0.812*/ 0.803/* 0.860***
0.782

0.730*/ 0.849/* 0.846*/ 0.846/* 0.869*/ 0.840/* 0.857*/ 0.908/* 0.811***
0.840

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Mean 2000e2008

0.692*/ 0.801/* 0.831*/ 0.863/* 0.838*/ 0.737/* 0.839*/ 0.887/* 0.802***
0.810

Note: /indicates a 0.1 signiﬁcance level; *indicates a 0.05 signiﬁcance
level; */ indicates a 0.01 signiﬁcance level.

Note: /indicates a 0.1 signiﬁcance level; *indicates a 0.05 signiﬁcance
level; */ indicates a 0.01 signiﬁcance level.

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275

6273

Fig. 6. Mean PM2.5 concentrations in each 10  10 km grid during the
entire modeling period (2000e2008) predicted by the AOD models.

allow us to get predictions for local particles at place of residence
and thus could potentially improve the ﬁrst exposure error. Since LU
regressions are not time variant, their temporal resolution tends to be
limited (Gryparis et al., 2009; Yanosky et al., 2009). Therefore some LU
regressions make use of ground monitors to get temporal variation into
their models. Our models add the temporal variation at far more
locations (compared to monitors) through the use of satellite data. By
building on the strengths of the commonly used and proven LU regression
models, yet incorporating the satellite data in our models we get the
beneﬁt of both the spatial resolution from the LU models and the
temporal resolution from the satellite models. Since land use
regressions are calibrated only at measuring sites, our model also
beneﬁts by incorporating physical measurements over the entire spatial
domain being studied. For example, on 1.7.2002 we used 600 AOD grid
cells to integrate spatio-temporal variation compared to using 78
monitoring stations as traditionally used. In addition, it is important
to note that since PM monitors do not run daily, kriging is only a
viable option for weekly or monthly analysis. Using our prediction model
we allow for daily PM predictions across the study area.

National ﬁne-resolution monitoring girds are not available for most
countries of the world. Similarly, high resolution monitoring data for
retrospective exposure assessment studies are rarely available.
Therefore, satellite remote sensing data can be of great value,
especially in areas that are particularly distant from monitoring
stations (e.g., many semi-rural and rural areas). Our novel model could
be applied in various disciplines, particularly in epidemiology. Our
PM2.5 exposure model will allow us to gain spatial resolution in the
acute effects and an assessment of long-term effects in the entire
population, rather than a selective sample from urban locations as
commonly done in current epidemiological studies. Studies looking into
the association between PM2.5 and mortality, reduced birth weight etc.
thus could greatly beneﬁt from our models for both chronic and acute
effects. The main limitation of the present study is the relatively
coarse spatial resolution of 10  10 km obtained through the MODIS
satellite. However, as satellite remote sensing evolves, higher spatial
resolution data, e.g., 1  1 km, should become available which will
further reduce exposure error. Consequently, this will enable us to
assess location-speciﬁc PM exposures near residences,

6274

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275

work places, etc. In addition by using our fourth stage model (the local
PM step) we can partly address the coarse resolution of the satellite
data by obtaining address speciﬁc results while producing a better ﬁt
for the model. Another limitation is the lack of data on the composition
of AOD particles. Future analysis may allow us to develop exposure
estimation for speciﬁc PM components and other pollutants.

5. Conclusion In summary, we have clearly demonstrated how AOD can be
   used reliably to predict daily PM2.5 mass concentrations. By
   including LU terms and later spatial smoothing our models perform
   much better than previous AODePM2.5 models. In addition, our model
   allows one to assess short term and long-term human exposures in
   order to investigate both the acute and effects of ambient particles,
   respectively.

Acknowledgments Supported by the Harvard Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) Center Grant RD83479801, NIH grant ES012044 and the Environment
and Health Fund (EHF) Israel. The authors also want to thank Dr. William
L Ridgway, Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Climate and Radiation
Branch, Code 613.2, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD
20771 and Steven J. Melly, department of environmental health, Harvard
school of public health, Harvard University.

References Aguilera, I., Sunyer, J., Fernández-Patier, R., Hoek, G.,
Aguirre-Alfaro, A., Meliefste, K., Bomboi-Mingarro, M.T.,
Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J., Herce-Garraleta, D., Brunekreef, B., 2007.
Estimation of Outdoor NOx, NO2, and BTEX exposure in a cohort of
pregnant women using land use regression modeling. Environmental Science
& Technology 42, 815e821. Baccarelli, A., 2009. Breathe deeply into your
genes!: genetic variants and air pollution effects. American Journal of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 179, 431e432. Barnett, A.G.,
Williams, G.M., Schwartz, J., Best, T.L., Neller, A.H., Petroeschevsky,
A.L., Simpson, R.W., 2006. The effects of air pollution on
hospitalizations for cardiovascular disease in elderly people in
Australian and New Zealand cities. Environmental Health Perspectives
114, 1018e1023. Briggs, D.J., de Hoogh, C., Gulliver, J., Wills, J.,
Elliott, P., Kingham, S., Smallbone, K., 2000. A regression-based method
for mapping trafﬁc-related air pollution: application and testing in
four contrasting urban environments. The Science of the Total
Environment 253, 151e167. Chu, D., Kaufman, Y., Ichoku, C., Remer, L.,
Tanré, D., Holben, B., 2002. Validation of MODIS aerosol optical depth
retrieval over land. Geophysical Research Letters 29, 8007.
doi:10.1029/2001GL013205. Dockery, D., Pope, C., Xu, X., Spengler, J.,
Ware, J., Fay, M., Ferris, B., Speizer, F., 1993. An association between
air pollution and mortality in six US cities. The New England Journal of
Medicine 329, 1753e1759. Dominici, F., Peng, R.D., Bell, M.L., Pham, L.,
McDermott, A., Zeger, S.L., Samet, J.M., 2006. Fine particulate air
pollution and hospital admission for cardiovascular and respiratory
diseases. JAMA 295, 1127e1134. Engel-Cox, J., Holloman, C., Coutant, B.,
Hoff, R., 2004. Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of MODIS
satellite sensor data for regional and urban scale air quality.
Atmospheric Environment 38, 2495e2509. EPA, 2010. USEPA National
Emissions Inventory. http://www.epa.gov/ttnchie1/ eiinformation.html.
Franklin, M., Zeka, A., Schwartz, J., 2006. Association between PM2.5
and all-cause and speciﬁc-cause mortality in 27 US communities. Journal
of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology 17, 279e287.
Gryparis, A., Paciorek, C.J., Zeka, A., Schwartz, J., Coull, B.A., 2009.
Measurement error caused by spatial misalignment in environmental
epidemiology. Biostatistics (Oxford, England) 10, 258e274. Gupta, P.,
Christopher, S., Wang, J., Gehrig, R., Lee, Y., Kumar, N., 2006.
Satellite remote sensing of particulate matter and air quality
assessment over global cities. Atmospheric Environment 40, 5880e5892.
Homer, C., Huang, C., Yang, L., Wylie, B., Coan, M., 2004. Development
of a 2001 national landcover database for the United States.
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 70, 829e840.

Hutchison, K., 2003. Applications of MODIS satellite data and products
for monitoring air quality in the state of Texas. Atmospheric
Environment 37, 2403e2412. Katsouyanni, K., Schwartz, J., Spix, C.,
Touloumi, G., Zmirou, D., Zanobetti, A., Wojtyniak, B., Vonk, J.,
Tobias, A., Pönkä, A., 1996. Short term effects of air pollution on
health: a European approach using epidemiologic time series data: the
APHEA protocol. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 50, 12e18.
Kaufman, Y., Fraser, R., 1983. Light extinction by aerosols during
summer air pollution. Journal of Applied Meteorology 22, 1694e1706.
Kaufman, Y., Tanré, D., Boucher, O., 2002. A satellite view of aerosols
in the climate system. Nature 419, 215e223. King, M.D., Kaufman, Y.J.,
Menzel, W.P., Tanre, D., 1992. Remote sensing of cloud, aerosol, and
water vapor properties from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer
(MODIS). IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 30, 2e27.
Koelemeijer, R., Homan, C., Matthijsen, J., 2006. Comparison of spatial
and temporal variations of aerosol optical thickness and particulate
matter over Europe. Atmospheric Environment 40, 5304e5315. Laden, F.,
Schwartz, J., Speizer, F.E., Dockery, D.W., 2006. Reduction in ﬁne
particulate air pollution and mortality: extended follow-up of the
Harvard Six Cities study. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical
Care Medicine 173, 667e672. Le Tertre, A., Medina, S., Samoli, E.,
Forsberg, B., Michelozzi, P., Boumghar, A., Vonk, J.M., Bellini, A.,
Atkinson, R., Ayres, J.G., Sunyer, J., Schwartz, J., Katsouyanni, K.,
2002. Short-term effects of particulate air pollution on cardiovascular
diseases in eight European cities. Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health 56, 773e779. Lee, H., Liu, Y., Coull, B., Schwartz, J.,
Koutrakis, P., 2011. A novel calibration approach of MODIS AOD data to
predict PM2.5 concentrations. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics
Discussions 11, 9769e9795. Levy, R., Remer, L., Mattoo, S., Vermote, E.,
Kaufman, Y., 2007. Second-generation operational algorithm: retrieval of
aerosol properties over land from inversion of Moderate Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer spectral reﬂectance. Journal of Geophysical
Research 112, D-13211. doi:10.1029/2006JD007811. Lin, S., Munsie, J.,
Hwang, S., Fitzgerald, E., Cayo, M., 2002. Childhood asthma
hospitalization and residential exposure to state route trafﬁc.
Environmental Research 88, 73e81. Liu, Y., Park, R., Jacob, D., Li, Q.,
Kilaru, V., Sarnat, J., 2004. Mapping annual mean ground-level PM2.5
concentrations using Multiangle Imaging Spectroradiometer aerosol
optical thickness over the contiguous United States. Journal of
Geophysical Research 109, 3269e3278. Liu, L.J.S., Curjuric, I., Keidel,
D., Heldstab, J., Künzli, N., Bayer-Oglesby, L., Ackermann-Liebrich, U.,
Schindler, C., 2007. Characterization of source-speciﬁc air pollution
exposure for a large population-based Swiss cohort (SAPALDIA).
Environmental Health Perspectives 115, 1638e1645. Liu, Y., Paciorek,
C.J., Koutrakis, P., 2009. Estimating regional spatial and temporal
variability of PM2.5 concentrations using satellite data, meteorology,
and land use information. Environmental Health Perspectives 117,
886e892. Maheswaran, R., Haining, R., Brindley, P., Law, J., Pearson,
T., Fryers, P., Wise, S., Campbell, M., 2005. Outdoor air pollution,
mortality, and hospital admissions from coronary heart disease in
Shefﬁeld, UK: a small-area level ecological study. European Heart
Journal 26, 2543e2549. Maune, D., 2007. In: Maune, D.F. (Ed.), Digital
Elevation Model Technologies and Applications: The DEM Users Manual.
American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, p. 655. Miller,
K., Siscovick, D., Sheppard, L., Shepherd, K., Sullivan, J., Anderson,
G., Kaufman, J., 2007. Long-term exposure to air pollution and incidence
of cardiovascular events in women. New England Journal of Medicine 356,
447e458. NASA, 2010. MODIS-Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer. NCDC, 2010. The National Climatic Data Center Data
Inventories. Ostro, B., Broadwin, R., Green, S., Feng, W., Lipsett, M.,
2006. Fine particulate air pollution and mortality in nine California
counties: results from CALFINE. Environmental Health Perspectives 114,
29e33. Paciorek, C., Liu, Y., Moreno-Macias, H., Kondragunta, S., 2008.
Spatiotemporal associations between GOES aerosol optical depth
retrievals and ground-level PM2.5. Environmental Science & Technology
42, 5800e5806. Peters, A., Dockery, D., Muller, J., Mittleman, M.,
2001a. Increased particulate air pollution and the triggering of
myocardial infarction. Circulation 103, 2810e2815. Peters, A., Frohlich,
M., Doring, A., Immervoll, T., Wichmann, H.E., Hutchinson, W.L., Pepys,
M.B., Koenig, W., 2001b. Particulate air pollution is associated with an
acute phase response in men; results from the MONICA-Augsburg Study.
European Heart Journal 22, 1198e1204. Pope 3rd, C.A., Thun, M.J.,
Namboodiri, M.M., Dockery, D.W., Evans, J.S., Speizer, F.E., Heath Jr.,
C.W., 1995. Particulate air pollution as a predictor of mortality in a
prospective study of U.S. adults. American Journal of Respiratory and
Critical Care Medicine 151, 669e674. Pope III, C., Burnett, R., Thun,
M., Calle, E., Krewski, D., Ito, K., Thurston, G., 2002. Lung cancer,
cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term exposure to ﬁne particulate air
pollution. JAMA 287, 1132e1141. Remer, L.A., Kaufman, Y.J., Tanré, D.,
Mattoo, S., Chu, D.A., Martins, J.V., Li, R.-R., Ichoku, C., Levy, R.C.,
Kleidman, R.G., Eck, T.F., Vermote, E., Holben, B.N., 2005. The MODIS
aerosol algorithm, products, and validation. Journal of the Atmospheric
Sciences 62, 947e973.

I. Kloog et al. / Atmospheric Environment 45 (2011) 6267e6275 Ryan,
P.H., Lemasters, G.K., Levin, L., Burkle, J., Biswas, P., Hu, S.,
Grinshpun, S., Reponen, T., 2008. A land-use regression model for
estimating microenvironmental diesel exposure given multiple addresses
from birth through childhood. The Science of the Total Environment 404,
139e147. Salomonson, V., Barnes, W., Maymon, P., Montgomery, H., Ostrow,
H., 1989. MODISadvanced facility instrument for studies of the earth as
a system. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 27,
145e153. Schäfer, K., Harbusch, A., Emeis, S., Koepke, P., Wiegner, M.,
2008. Correlation of aerosol mass near the ground with aerosol optical
depth during two seasons in Munich. Atmospheric Environment 42,
4036e4046. Schwartz, J., Morris, R., 1995. Air pollution and hospital
admissions for cardiovascular disease in Detroit, Michigan. American
Journal of Epidemiology 142, 23e35. Schwartz, J., 1994. Air pollution
and daily mortality: a review and meta analysis. Environmental Research
64, 36e52. Schwartz, J., 1996. Air pollution and hospital admissions for
respiratory disease. Epidemiology 7, 20e28. Sunyer, J., Basagana, X.,
2001. Particles, and not gases, are associated with the risk of death in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. International
Journal of Epidemiology 30, 1138e1140. TIGER, 2006. Topologically
Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing System. US Census.

6275

Wellenius, G.A., Bateson, T.F., Mittleman, M.A., Schwartz, J., 2005.
Particulate air pollution and the rate of hospitalization for congestive
heart failure among medicare beneﬁciaries in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
American Journal of Epidemiology 161, 1030e1036. Willis, A., Jerrett,
M., Burnett, R.T., Krewski, D., 2003. The association between sulfate
air pollution and mortality at the county scale: an exploration of the
impact of scale on a long-term exposure study. Journal of Toxicology and
Environmental Health 66, 1605e1624. Yanosky, J.D., Paciorek, C.J., Suh,
H.H., 2009. Predicting chronic ﬁne and coarse particulate exposures
using spatiotemporal models for the Northeastern and Midwestern United
States. Environmental Health Perspectives 117, 522e529. Zanobetti, A.,
Schwartz, J., Dockery, D.W., 2000. Airborne particles are a risk factor
for hospital admissions for heart and lung disease. Environmental Health
Perspectives 108, 1071e1077. Zanobetti, A., Franklin, M., Koutrakis, P.,
Schwartz, J., 2009. Fine particulate air pollution and its components in
association with cause-speciﬁc emergency admissions. Environmental
Health 8, 58e70. Zeger, S.L., Thomas, D., Dominici, F., Samet, J.M.,
Schwartz, J., Dockery, D., Cohen, A., 2000. Exposure measurement error
in time-series studies of air pollution: concepts and consequences.
Environmental Health Perspectives 108, 419e426.


