Science of the Total Environment 432 (2012) 85--92

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Science of the Total Environment journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv

Temporal and spatial assessments of minimum air temperature using
satellite surface temperature measurements in Massachusetts, USA Itai
Kloog ⁎, Alexandra Chudnovsky, Petros Koutrakis, Joel Schwartz
Department of Environmental Health --- Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Dr
West, Boston, MA, 02215, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history: Received 29 March 2012 Received in revised form 29 May
2012 Accepted 30 May 2012 Available online 20 June 2012 Keywords: Air
temperature Surface temperature MODIS Epidemiology Exposure error

a b s t r a c t Although meteorological stations provide accurate air
temperature observations, their spatial coverage is limited and thus
often insufﬁcient for epidemiological studies. Satellite data expand
spatial coverage, enhancing our ability to estimate near surface air
temperature (Ta). However, the derivation of Ta from surface temperature
(Ts) measured by satellites is far from being straightforward. In this
study, we present a novel approach that incorporates land use
regression, meteorological variables and spatial smoothing to ﬁrst
calibrate between Ts and Ta on a daily basis and then predict Ta for
days when satellite Ts data were not available. We applied mixed
regression models with daily random slopes to calibrate Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) Ts data with monitored Ta
measurements for 2003. Then, we used a generalized additive mixed model
with spatial smoothing to estimate Ta in days with missing Ts.
Out-of-sample tenfold cross-validation was used to quantify the accuracy
of our predictions. Our model performance was excellent for both days
with available Ts and days without Ts observations (mean out-of-sample
R2 = 0.946 and R2 = 0.941 respectively). Furthermore, based on the high
quality predictions we investigated the spatial patterns of Ta within
the study domain as they relate to urban vs. non-urban land uses. © 2012
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction Air temperature measurements are of great importance for
   epidemiological studies. Recently, it has been shown that variation
   in ambient minimum air temperature is correlated with human morbidity
   and mortality, especially for cardiovascular diseases (Basu et al.,
   2008; Medina-Ramón et al., 2006; Zanobetti and Schwartz, 2008).
   Furthermore, minimum temperature is considered a better predictor of
   excess mortality compared to mean or maximum temperature (Saez et
   al., 1995; Zanobetti and Schwartz, 2008). In addition, near-surface
   air temperature (Ta) and relative humidity are the most relevant
   variables to disease vector monitoring and the prediction of disease
   incidences. In the thermal infrared region of spectra, satellite
   sensors measure top of the atmosphere radiances, from which surface
   brightness temperatures are derived using Planck's Law (Dash et al.,
   2002). In order to compute land surface temperature (Ts), these
   brightness temperatures are further corrected for: (1) atmospheric
   effects, including absorption, upward emission, and downward
   irradiance reﬂected from the surface (Franc and Cracknell, 1994); and
   (2) spectral emissivity, aiming to account for the roughness
   properties of the land surface, the amount

Abbreviations: Ts, Surface temperature; Ta, Air temperature; MODIS,
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer; MA, Massachusetts. ⁎
Corresponding author at: Department of Environmental Health ---
Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard School of Public
Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Dr West, Boston, MA, 02215, USA. E-mail
address: ekloog@hsph.harvard.edu (I. Kloog). 0048-9697/$ -- see front
matter © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.05.095

and nature of vegetation cover, and the thermal properties and moisture
content of the soil (Friedl, 2002). Whereas Ta measurements provide spot
data of a selected point or route, remotely sensed Ts data have been
widely used to retrieve a spatially continuous view of the land Ts. In
this regard, the ability to cover large areas simultaneously on a
repeated basis is a signiﬁcant advantage of satellite observations over
conventional climatic methods. Although the genesis and temporal
dynamics of surface and air temperatures have dissimilarities, they are
nevertheless related (Oke, 1995; Voogt and Oke, 1997). Ts modulates the
air temperature of the lower layer of urban atmosphere, and is a key
factor in determining surface radiation and energy exchange and human
comfort in the cities (Voogt and Oke, 1998). In addition, the physical
properties of various types of urban surfaces, their albedo, thermal
properties, street geometry, trafﬁc loads, and anthropogenic activities
are important factors that determine Ts in the urban environments
(Chudnovsky et al., 2004). However, the derivation of near surface Ta
from satellite information is not straightforward due to the
dissimilarity in the genesis and temporal dynamics of both variables.
Several studies have shown correlations between Ta and Ts when thermal
data were obtained from a distance of 3 m (Stoll and Brazel, 1992) or
acquired by air-borne sensors at high spatial resolutions (Saaroni et
al., 2000; Yang et al., 1994). Recently, several studies correlated
between daytime Ts satellite observations and Ta at ground
meteorological stations across non-urban areas. For example, Fu et al.
(2011) applied linear regression to estimate air temperature of an
alpine meadow on the Northern Tibetan Plateau. They estimated at

86

I. Kloog et al. / Science of the Total Environment 432 (2012) 85--92

heights of 1.5--2.1 m by using Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) data, showing that Ts data were accurate
enough to estimate daily minimum and nighttime mean Ta using linear
regression (R2 > 0.55, p b 0.01). Vancutsem et al. (2010) explored the
possibility of retrieving high-resolution Ta data from the MODIS
nighttime surface temperature over different ecosystems in Africa (with
Ts--Ta) centered at 0 °C, a mean absolute error (MAE) = 1.73 °C and a
standard deviation = 2.4 °C. Another approach to estimate air
temperature is based on the correlation between Ts and spectral
satellite-derived Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), denoted
in the literature often as the Temperature-Vegetation Index (TVX)
(Goward et al., 1994; Prihodko and Goward, 1997). In contrast, in the
urban environment, since 1989 most papers have reported a qualitative
description of thermal patterns. This includes the spatial distribution
and magnitude of Urban Heat Islands across the city as well as simple
correlations between Ts and land-use and land-cover types (Voogt and
Oke, 2003). Importantly, as highlighted in the recent review by Weng
(2009), a precise transfer function between Ts and the near ground Ta is
not yet available although energy balance models try to provide this
capability. For example, thermal remote sensing coupling with urban
climate models of the atmosphere is applied to the study of urban
surface energy models (Friedl, 2002; Voogt and Oke, 2003). Generally,
correlations of surface temperature with air temperature are superior at
night (Dousset, 1989) when microscale advection is reduced. During day
hours, due to the inﬂuence of the direct solar illumination, additional
factors are apparent leading to a more complex interaction between Ta
and Ts: satellite--sun geometry, surface geometry, sky view factor,
thermal properties of the underlined surfaces and weather conditions. In
this paper we hypothesized that the Ts--Ta relationship varies daily;
therefore, in order to use available cloud-free Ts data, it is necessary
to calibrate on a daily basis using ground Ta measurements. The
underlying assumption is that the effect of time-varying parameters
(e.g., surface reﬂectance, soil moisture, land use and land cover

Ground weather stations Massachusetts A1 highways Full MODIS Surface
Temp Grid

0 15 30

characteristics, vapor pressure gradients, the vegetation--soil
interaction and surface winds) that inﬂuence the Ts--Ta relationship can
be taken into account by using daily available calibrations.
Furthermore, we present a novel approach that incorporates land use
regression, meteorological variables and spatial smoothing to predict Ta
for grid cells when satellite Ts measures are not available. We pursue
the use of night time satellite data for estimating daily minimum
temperatures. Finally, based on our model we examined the spatial
pattern of Ta behavior for 2003 in the study domain. 2. Methods 2.1.
Study domain The spatial domain of our study included the state of
Massachusetts (MA), USA (Fig. 1). The state of MA is located on the
northeastern coast of US and has an area of 27,340 km2. MA has a
population of 6,349,097 according to the 2000 census (USCB, 2000).
Approximately two thirds of the state's population lives in Greater
Boston, most of which is either urban or suburban. MA had an average
annual air temperature of 9.26 °C during 2003 (NCDC, 2010). Importantly,
there are signiﬁcant climatic differences between its eastern and
western sections. Speciﬁcally, MA has cold winters and moderately warm
summers. The mountainous regions in the west (the Berkshires) have both
the coldest winters and the coolest summers. MA has diverse land use and
land types including many urban areas, rural hill towns, forests, small
farms, rivers, lakes, mountainous regions and an eastern sea shoreline.
2.2. Surface temperature and emissivity data The satellite data used in
this study, are the land surface temperatures (Ts) at a 1 km spatial
resolution derived from the Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) sensors on board the Terra satellite. We used
Terra nighttime Land Surface Temperature

N

60 Kilometers

Fig. 1. Map of the study area showing the full surface temperature grid
and all air temperature monitor station across Massachusetts.

I. Kloog et al. / Science of the Total Environment 432 (2012) 85--92

and Emissivity (MOD11\_L2) product (Wan, 2006, 2008; Wan et al., 2002).
The MODIS Ts is derived from two thermal infrared band channels, i.e.,
31 (10.78--11.28 μm) and 32 (11.77--12.27 μm) using the split-window
algorithm (Wan, 2008) which corrects for atmospheric effects and
emissivity using a look-up table based on global land surface emissivity
in the TIR region (Thermal Infra-Red, MODIS channels 31--32 or
10,000--12,500 nm) (Snyder et al., 1998). Emissivity is an additional
parameter that inﬂuences the Ts measurements. First, it causes a
reduction of surface-emitted radiance. In addition, the anisotropy of
reﬂectivity and emissivity may reduce or increase the total radiance
from the surface (Prata, 1994). Emissivity is a function of wavelength,
and is not only controlled by water content, chemical composition,
structure, and roughness (Snyder et al., 1998), but it can vary
signiﬁcantly with plant species, areal density, and growth (Snyder et
al., 1998). Surface emissivity values are available in MOD11\_L2 product
in MODIS bands 31 and 32 and they are assigned based on land cover types
(Wan, 2006). The MODIS derived radiometric temperature corrected for
atmospheric transmission was further corrected with spectral emissivity
to account for the kinetic temperature of the object based on the
following (Eq. 1) (Jensen, 2009): Tkin ¼ Trad =EmmisivityðλÞ

1=4

ð1Þ

where Tkin is related to the true kinetic temperature (and further
denoted here as Ts) and Trad is the radiant temperature of an object
recorded by a remote sensor. The nighttime Ts generally presents good
correlations with ground measurements across most of the sites in the
USA, with absolute biases less than 0.8 °C and RMSEs less than 1.7 °C
(Wan, 2008). Importantly, the errors in the MOD11\_L2 product weakly
depend on the sensor view zenith angle and are independent of surface
air temperature, humidity, wind speed, and soil moisture (Wang et al.,
2008). A serious limitation of the thermal satellite remote sensing
techniques is the requirement for clear skies in order to derive
accurate readings of Ts making cloud cover. To that end we identiﬁed
clear sky observations using the current best available cloud mask
algorithm ﬂagged in the MODIS data (Ackerman et al., 1998). More details
about MODIS Ts data can be found in previous papers by Wan (Wan, 2008;
Wang et al., 2008). To assure that ground Ta measurements represent the
Ts at the time of satellite overpass (10:30 pm local time), we
correlated between Ta minimal during a day, and Ts from Terra. We did
not collect Ts from the Aqua platform. 2.3. Meteorological data Daily
data for Ta and wind speed across MA for 2003 were obtained from four
different sources: The National Climatic Data Center (NCDC), US
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), WeatherBug Professional (WB), and
Weather Underground Inc. (WU). NCDC and EPA are government agencies and
have been collecting meteorological data close to a century now, while
the latter two (WB and WU) have been established after 2000. WB is a
commercial provider of weather information services, while WU is a
network of personal weather stations. All of the above sources have been
used in multiple studies in the past few years (Rosenzweig et al., 2006;
Von Klot et al., 2008, 2009; Wellenius et al., 2006). To validate the WU
and WB stations compared to the more traditional NCDC and EPA sources we
have matched each of the WB and WU stations to the closest NCDC weather
service station within 10 km, and computed the correlations. The average
correlation (R 2) was 0.960, suggesting that the use of WB and WU
stations is unlikely to be imprecise (see Fig. 2). We obtained mean,
minimum and maximum daily temperatures from the NCDC, EPA, WB and WU
from January to December 2003 and removed outliers and extreme values
suggestive of coding or

87

R2=0.960

Fig. 2. A scatter plot of the correlation between the weather
underground/weatherbug stations and NCDC stations.

measurement errors (extreme temperature values that do not naturally
occur due to measurement error such as reported temperature values of
over 50 °C or below −40 °C). There were 164 daily monitors operating
across MA during the study period (see Fig. 1). Since there was no
hourly temperature reading available for all stations, we choose minimum
Ta as the closest indicator for nighttime temperature. We used wind
speed data from only three available sources: NCDC, EPA and WU and thus
used ordinary kriging to interpolate the missing data for each 1 × 1 km
grid cell. 2.4. Spatial predictors of air temperature Initially we
tested the daily correlation between Ta and Ts. In addition, to improve
the prediction ability of the ﬁnal constructed model other potential
predictors we expected, a priori, to have a physical inﬂuence on Ta were
considered for inclusion in the model (trafﬁc density etc.). All the
potential predictors were initially included in the model. The only
variable that was removed was trafﬁc density, which was much less
plausible than impervious surfaces, etc. in the ﬁrst place, and this was
because it was not signiﬁcant in the model. The following variables were
statistically signiﬁcant and thus were used in our ﬁnal models:
emissivity, percent of impervious surfaces, elevation and NDVI. 2.4.1.
Percent of impervious surfaces These data were obtained through the 2001
national land cover data (NLCD) Multi-Resolution Land Characteristics
Consortium (MRLC) (Homer et al., 2004). Data were obtained as raster
ﬁles with 30 m cell size. Percent of impervious surfaces included all
sub categories for developed areas. 2.4.2. Elevation These data were
obtained through the National Elevation Dataset (NED) (Maune, 2007). NED
is distributed by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and provides
seamless raster elevation data of the conterminous United States. NED is
distributed in geographic coordinates at a resolution of 1 arc sec. MA
has notable elevation differences between its eastern and western parts.
Therefore, elevation was used as a spatial predictor since generally the
higher the elevation the lower the air temperature.

88

I. Kloog et al. / Science of the Total Environment 432 (2012) 85--92

2.4.3. NDVI Satellite-derived Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
(NDVI) data have been shown to be a temporal indicator of the vegetation
growth rate, its onset, end, peak and duration of vegetation greenness,
and also the periodicity of the photosynthetic activity (Reed et al.,
1994; Yang et al., 1994). The rationale for using two wavelengths to
calculate NDVI is the sensitivity of leaf pigments to red light
(RED‐wavelengths centered at 660 nm) and high reﬂectance of leaf
structure at nearinfrared (NIR‐wavelengths ranging from 700 to 1100 nm)
(Jensen, 2007; Tucker, 1979) (Eq. 2):     NIR RED NIR RED NDVI ¼ ρ
−ρ = ρ þρ :

ð2Þ

We used monthly vegetation index products (MOD13A3) at a 1 km spatial
resolution because NDVI remains relatively constant during each month.
2.5. Statistical methods To estimate Ta in each grid cell on each day we
ﬁrst calibrated the Ts measurements for each day using grid cells for
which both Ta measurements and Ts values were available (stage 1). This
stage 1 model was then used to predict Ta in grid cells without Ta
measurements but with available Ts measurements (stage 2). Since Ts
values are often missing due to cloud cover or retrieval errors, the
stage 2 model failed to provide predictions for many grid cell--day
combinations. To estimate Ta when no Ts data are available we ﬁt a third
model that takes advantage of the association of grid cell Ts values
with Ta monitoring located elsewhere and the association with Ts values
in neighboring grid cells (stage 3). Importantly, since daily Ta for the
whole of MA varies considerably between different geographical regions,
MA was divided into three regions: eastern MA, central MA and west MA.
The daily mean Ta was calculated for each region. First a mixed model
regression with day-speciﬁc random intercepts and Ts slopes was
performed (stage 1). At each day we estimate a separate slope in the
relationship between Ta and Ts that captures its temporal variability.
Speciﬁcally we ﬁtted the model (Eq. 3):     Taij ¼ α þ uj þ β1 þ vj
Tsij þ β2 Wind Speedij þ β3 Elevationi   þβ4 NDVIik þ β5 Impervious
surfacesi þ εij uj vj e½ðooÞ; Σ

ð3Þ

where: Taij is the measured Ta at a spatial site i on a day j; α and uj
are the ﬁxed and random (site speciﬁc) intercepts, respectively, Tsij is
the Ts value in the grid cell corresponding to site i on a day j; β1 and
vj are the ﬁxed and random slopes, respectively. Wind Speedij, and
NDVIik are the values in the grid cells corresponding to site i on a day
j (or month k for NDVI). Elevationi and Impervious surfacesi are the
means in grid cells corresponding to site i. Finally, Σ is an
unstructured variance--covariance matrix for the random effects and εij
is the error term at site i on a day j. To validate our model, the
dataset was repeatedly randomly divided into 90% and 10% splits.
Predictions for the held-out 10% of the data were made from the model ﬁt
of the remaining 90% of the data. The process was repeated ten times and
cross-validated R2 values were computed. To test for bias we regressed
the measured Ta values against the predicted values in each site on each
day. Temporal R2 was calculated by regressing delta Ta against delta
predicted where: delta Ta is the difference between the actual Ta in
place i at time t and the annual mean Ta at that location, and delta
predicted is deﬁned similarly for the predicted values generated from
the model. Spatial R2 was calculated by regressing the annual mean Ta
against the mean predicted Ta at place i. In the next stage (stage 2),
we used the same stage 1 model to predict Ta in grid cells where Ts data
is available but Ta monitoring data is not. Finally in stage 3, we
estimated the daily Ta for all grid cells in the study domain for days
when Ts data were unavailable using stage 2 data. To capture the ability
of neighboring cells to ﬁll in the cells with

missing Ts values, we regressed the predicted Ta in each cell on each
day against the mean of the Ta measurements on that day in each region
(the average Ta measured at all the available Ta measurements on each
day) and a smooth function of latitude and longitude, with random
cellspeciﬁc intercepts and slopes. To allow for temporal variations in
the spatial correlation, a separate spatial surface (a thin plate
spline) was ﬁt for each two-month period. In contrast to the ﬁrst stage,
the third stage model includes a cell speciﬁc random slope and intercept
that captures the spatial variability for each cell relative to the
average in that region (Eq. 4): PredTaij ¼ ðα þ ui Þ þ ðβ1 þ vi ÞmTajr þ
SmoothðX; YÞkðjÞ þ Bimon   h i þεij uj vi e ðo oÞ; Ωβ

ð4Þ

where: PredTaij is the predicted Ta at a spatial site i on a day j from
the ﬁrst prediction model; mTajr is the mean Ta across the speciﬁc
region on a day j; α and ui are the ﬁxed and random intercepts,
respectively; β1 and vi are the ﬁxed and random slopes, respectively.
The smoothing of X,Y is a thin plate spline ﬁt of the latitude and
longitude, which is similar to kriging, but it allows greater spatial
anisotropy, k(j) denotes the two-month period in which day j falls (that
is, a separate spatial smooth was ﬁt for each two-month period), and
Bimon (bi-monthly period) is an indicator for each two month period.
Using this ﬁnal model, we again performed cross-validation to estimate
the goodness of ﬁt. We also tested how the performance of our models
compared to using traditional spatial smoothing of monitored values
(kriging). All modeling was done in R statistical software version
2.12.2. 3. Results The upper panel of Fig. 3 presents a scatter plot of
the Ta--Ts relationship before the stage 1 calibration whereas the
relationship between the predicted out of sample Ta vs the actual Ta is
shown in the lower panel of Fig. 3. These results show how by using the
daily calibration approach we can improve the ﬁt from a R 2 of 0.848 to
a R 2 of 0.949 (P b 0.001). Fig. 4 presents the daily distribution of
random slopes of Ts in 2003. It also shows the difference of the day
speciﬁc slopes from the average slope. As can be seen the relationship
between Ta and Ts varies daily which is why the stage 1 calibration
model is necessary. The ﬁrst stage models all revealed very high
out-of-sample ﬁts with a mean out of sample R 2 of 0.949 (P b 0.001),
and as expected a highly signiﬁcant association between Ta and the main
explanatory variable---Ts (Table 1). The spatial and temporal out of
sample results also presented very high ﬁts (Table 1). For the spatial
model the mean out-of-sample R 2 was 0.960 and for the temporal model
the mean out-of-sample R 2 was 0.800 (P b 0.001). We found no bias in
our cross validation results (slope of observed vs. predicted = 1.00).
Stage 3 models also performed well with a mean out-of-sample R 2 of
0.947 (P b 0.001), which is extremely high considering that these were
days with neither ground Ta data nor satellite Ts data in the grid cells
being predicted. Fig. 5 shows the spatial pattern of predicted Ta values
from the Ts models, averaged over the entire study period. Mean
predicted minimum Ta values for 2003 ranged from 0.5 to 5.8 °C.
Generally urban areas appear warmer than the surrounding areas. To
explore these differences we analyzed Ta from eight different
representative sites covering an area of 4×4 km2 (highlighted in Fig. 5
by rectangles). The results are shown in Fig. 6. As it can be seen in
Fig. 6, there are temperature changes between the rural open and the
built-up areas. There is a noticeable change between urban area yearly
mean Ta (e.g. point 2 predicted Ta = 5.2 °C) and vegetative open space
areas (e.g. point 6-predicted Ta = 2.3 °C). In addition, sampled
suburban areas located near main

I. Kloog et al. / Science of the Total Environment 432 (2012) 85--92

89

Air Temperature

Density

A

Daily Surface Temperature (Ts) Slopes

R2=0.846

Fig. 4. A density plot exhibiting the daily variation of surface
temperature slopes by time for 2003.

Surface Temperature

Air Temperature

B

R2=0.940 Predicted Temperature Fig. 3. A scatter plot of the air
temperature--surface temperature relationship before (A) and after (B)
the daily 2003 calibrations.

roads exhibited higher temperature of 0.4--0.5 °C compared to the inner
part. Also there is a great variability in standard deviation (SD) among
all sampled areas suggesting the local inﬂuence of different wind
patterns and urban canyon geometry on the measured Ta. The kriging model
resulted as expected in a much lower R2 compared to the R2 of our
combined model (0.30 versus 0.95 respectively). 4. Discussion In this
paper we assessed Ta across MA during the year 2003 based on MODIS Ts
data. There are several important key features differentiating our study
from previous studies (Fu et al., 2011; Saaroni et al., 2000; Vancutsem
et al., 2010; Yang et al., 1994). First and foremost, the use of daily
Ts--Ta calibrations allows a better assessment of space--time
interactions than models that include only spatially resolved time
invariant land use terms. Indeed, this daily calibration

approach exhibits the differences in short-term temperature values
between grid cells. Most importantly, our model predicts temperature
values for days when satellite Ts is unavailable (extensive cloud
coverage, snow etc.). For example, in epidemiology such data could be
used to assess the acute effects (short-term) of temperature (heat
waves, cold spells), and chronic effects (long-term) of temperature, or
combines the acute and chronic effects. As shown in our analysis, Ts can
be reliably used to predict Ta if modeled appropriately. Although
Vancutsem et al. (2010) found relatively good correlation between night
Ts and minimum Ta for vegetative and non-urban land cover types, six
stations exhibited higher variability between measured and predicted
values. This was explained by the following factors: (i) site location
near the sea or lake; (ii) directional effects due to the angular
anisotropy of emissivity; and (iii) temperature variability in
mountainous areas (e.g., difference of spatial scales, point vs. areal
average). Moreover, the differences were also related to location and
seasonal changes. Because different variables can inﬂuence the Ts--Ta
relationship we applied a mixed effects model approach. The underlying
assumption was that the effect of time-varying parameters inﬂuencing the
Ts--Ta relationship (e.g., relative humidity, surface properties, land
cover type, location) can be taken into account using daily
calibrations. In this regard, to the best of our knowledge our models
are the ﬁrst to cover both vast urban and rural areas across MA, USA
with high prediction accuracy for all sites. Our predicted mean values
across MA for the year 2003 are in a good agreement with the recorded
annual mean minimum temperatures. For example, in central Boston the
annual mean difference between measured (NCDC, 2010) and predicted Ta
was 0.2 °C (5.4°-- 5.6 °C respectively). In the semi-rural area of
Fitchburg, MA there was a slightly higher difference of 0.6 °C
(3.8°--3.2 °C respectively). Since our model could be used in studies on
the acute effects of temperature Table 1 Prediction accuracy---cross
validated R2 for all Ta prediction models for 2003. R2 Overall R2
Spatial R2 Temporal R2 Gamm R2 ⁎ Indicates a 0.1 signiﬁcance level. ⁎⁎
Indicates a 0.05 signiﬁcance level. ⁎⁎⁎ Indicates a 0.01 signiﬁcance
level.

0.949⁎⁎⁎ 0.960⁎⁎⁎ 0.800⁎⁎⁎ 0.947⁎⁎⁎

90

I. Kloog et al. / Science of the Total Environment 432 (2012) 85--92

predicted air temperature (C) Massachusetts A1 highways Annual mean
minimum

0.50 - 1.89 1.89 - 2.61 2.61 - 3.27 3.27- 3.77 3.77 - 4.17 4.17 - 4.54
4.54 - 5.05 5.05 - 5.81 Massachusetts state border Selected locations

Fig. 5. Mean air temperature in each 10 × 10 km grid during 2003
predicted by the surface temperature models.

we sampled the same points for a representative day in the summer
(12.08.2003). In central Boston the daily difference between measured
and predicted Ta was 0.54 °C (21.85°--21.24 °C respectively). In the
semi-rural area of Fitchburg, MA there was a slightly higher difference
of 0.15 °C (19.85°--19.70 °C respectively). There is a 2 °C difference
between urban and sub urban areas. We ran a cluster analysis and found a
signiﬁcant clustering (Pb 0.001) around metropolitan areas (Boston,
Worcester) and around coastal areas which is to be expected. Urban areas
tend to show higher

temperature values compared to rural areas due to well-known factors
such as the urban heat island (UHI) (Kim, 1992) etc. Areas closer to the
shoreline also tend to exhibit warmer temperatures compared to inland
areas since shoreline areas are kept warmer by the water's effect on the
air (Pieri et al., 2011). Based on our model results, the accuracy of
estimating Ta was independent of the other covariates (NDVI, wind speed
etc.). However, all covariates were found to be signiﬁcant (n= 5305,
Akaike information criterion---AIC = 30566.86, P b 0.001) and therefore
were included in our

6

0.8 0.7

5

Temperature, °C

0.5 3

0.4 0.3

2

Standard Deviation, °C

0.6 4

0.2 1 0.1 0

0 1

2

3

4

5

6

Urban Boston

Urban core

Suburb

Suburb, close to

Suburb

Open Vegetative

Boston

the main road

7 Urban Worcester

8 Suburb, close to the main road

Fig. 6. Selected 4 × 4 km representative regions exploring differences
in predicted annual mean air temperature between regions. The box
represents the predicted air temperature while the whisks represent the
standard deviation.

I. Kloog et al. / Science of the Total Environment 432 (2012) 85--92

ﬁnal model. Our results (as shown in Fig. 5) present high variability in
SD values. This can be explained by air temperature spatial variability
at the micro-scale level within selected locations (e.g. within points
1--8). In this regard, ground meteorological stations are unable to
capture this variability, which is needed for epidemiological studies.
However, the ability to estimate this variability is also available
through the use of urbanized surface energy balance models that are used
within the suite of weather forecasting models (Barry and Chorley, 2003;
Friedl, 2002; Voogt and Oke, 2003). Furthermore, urban and densely
populated areas exhibit a lower SD than the open rural and vegetation.
It is important to stress out that our prediction models were designed
to use only night MODIS Ts for several key reasons. First, health effect
studies examining the association between hot days and mortality suggest
that the main predictor is minimum temperature. This is because people
are more susceptible to the stress posed on the respiratory and
circulatory systems when there is no sufﬁcient nighttime cooling (Saez
et al., 1995; Zanobetti and Schwartz, 2008). Furthermore, during
nighttime, the Earth surface behaves almost as an isothermal and
homogeneous surface. In contrast, during daytime there is a signiﬁcant
directional anisotropy effect which is due to differences in sun
illumination vs. satellite viewing geometry, and different shading
effects within pixels, giving rise to temperature differences as much as
20 °C (Wan and Dozier, 1996). To the best of our knowledge, all previous
epidemiological research studying the association between temperature
and health effect have all used one central meteorological station to
assign temperature exposure (Halonen et al., 2010; McMichael et al.,
2008; O'Neill et al., 2003). This introduces exposure error, and likely
biases the effect estimates downward (Zeger et al., 2000). In this
regard, predicting nighttime temperature exposures with ﬁne spatial and
temporal resolutions will be critical for improving the accuracy in
future epidemiological studies. In addition these models could be useful
in other ﬁelds such as in urban planning, where development of
adaptation strategies is necessary. Although the minimum Ta may be
expected near dawn (in most but not all cases), we are correlating Ts
which overpasses at 10:30 pm local time with Ta at a different time. The
empirical question is whether the use of daily calibration, which
captures day to day differences in the association between Ts at one
time and Ta several hours later, is sufﬁcient to provide good predictive
power. The answer is yes. Our out of sample R2 is very high. Had the
predictive power been poor, we may have needed to revisit that choice,
but in the event it was very good, and so we continued to predict the
temperature that seemed most relevant for health studies. There are a
few limitations of the present study that need to be pointed out. For
one since we use daily calibrations in this model, this requires a large
amount of daily Ta stations which are not always available in other
areas. This model would not be transferable in areas without sufﬁcient
Ta monitors. However there is nothing special about New England
regarding the number of NCDC or WB/WU stations, and this information is
available all over the US, as well as in Europe. In addition, MODIS
satellite data only go back to March 2000 and thus historical
observations are not possible. The spatial resolution of 1 × 1 km is not
as high as that of the multispectral sensors (e.g., Landsat 60 m and
ASTER 90 m). However, these sensors have poor temporal resolutions which
are roughly every 2 weeks. Finally, our approach should be used to
assess daytime temperatures using daytime Ts. Although only the Terra
satellite was used in this analysis, we do plan on incorporating the
Aqua satellite in future studies and extending the model to a wider
geographic area, and more years.

5. Conclusion In summary, we have clearly demonstrated how Ts can be
   used reliably to predict daily Ta even in non-retrieval days. These
   results could be used in various studies such as health effect
   studies, urban climate and urban planning studies etc.

91

Acknowledgments This research was supported by a post-doctoral
fellowship from the Environment Health Fund (EHF), Jerusalem, Israel.
This study was funded by the Harvard EPA PM Center (R-832416), Harvard
Clean Air Research Center (CLARC) (R-83479801). The authors also thank
Steven J Melly, Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of
Public Health, Harvard University, and Richard Lowden from
weatherunderground.com and weatherbug.com.

References Ackerman SA, Strabala KI, Menzel WP, Frey RA, Moeller CC,
Gumley LE. Discriminating clear sky from clouds with MODIS. J Geophys
Res 1998;103:32,141--57. Barry RG, Chorley RJ. Atmosphere, weather, and
climate. Psychology Press; 2003. Basu R, Feng WY, Ostro BD.
Characterizing temperature and mortality in nine California counties.
Epidemiology 2008;19:138. Chudnovsky A, Ben-Dor E, Saaroni H. Diurnal
thermal behavior of selected urban objects using remote sensing
measurements. Energy Build 2004;36:1063--74. Dash P, Göttsche FM, Olesen
FS, Fischer H. Land surface temperature and emissivity estimation from
passive sensor data: theory and practice-current trends. Int J Remote
Sens 2002;23:2563--94. Dousset B. AVHRR-derived cloudiness and surface
temperature patterns over the Los Angeles area and their relationship to
land use. In: Proc. IGARSS, Vancouver, Canada; 1989. p. 2132--7. Franc
G, Cracknell A. Retrieval of land and sea surface temperature using
NOAA-11 AVHRR· data in north-eastern Brazil. Int J Remote Sens
1994;15:1695--712. Friedl M. Forward and inverse modeling of land
surface energy balance using surface temperature measurements. Remote
Sens Environ 2002;79:344--54. Fu G, Shen Z, Zhang X, Shi P, Zhang Y, Wu
J. Estimating air temperature of an alpine meadow on the Northern
Tibetan Plateau using MODIS land surface temperature. Acta Ecol Sin
2011;31:8-13. Goward SN, Waring RH, Dye DG, Yang J. Ecological remote
sensing at OTTER: satellite macroscale observations. Ecol Appl
1994;4:322--43. Halonen JI, Zanobetti A, Sparrow D, Vokonas PS, Schwartz
J. Associations between outdoor temperature and markers of inﬂammation:
a cohort study. Environ Health 2010;9:42. Homer C, Huang C, Yang L,
Wylie B, Coan M. Development of a 2001 national landcover database for
the United States. Photogramm Eng Remote Sens 2004;70:829--40. Jensen
JR. Remote sensing of the environment: an earth resource perspective.
NJ, Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River; 2007. Jensen JR. Remote sensing
of the environment. Pearson Education India; 2009. Kim H. Urban heat
island. Int J Remote Sens 1992;13:2319--36. Maune D. Digital elevation
model technologies and applications: the DEM users manual. Maune, DF:
American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing; 2007. McMichael
AJ, Wilkinson P, Kovats RS, Pattenden S, Hajat S, Armstrong B, et al.
International study of temperature, heat and urban mortality: the
‘ISOTHURM' project. Int J Epidemiol 2008;37:1121. Medina-Ramón M,
Zanobetti A, Cavanagh DP, Schwartz J. Extreme temperatures and
mortality: assessing effect modiﬁcation by personal characteristics and
speciﬁc cause of death in a multi-city case-only analysis. Environ
Health Perspect 2006;114:1331. NCDC. The national climatic data center
data inventories; 2010. O'Neill MS, Zanobetti A, Schwartz J. Modiﬁers of
the temperature and mortality association in seven US cities. Am J
Epidemiol 2003;157:1074. Oke T. The heat island of the urban boundary
layer: characteristics, causes and effects. Kluwer Academic; 1995. Pieri
S, Zargli A, Tzouvadakis I. Design principles for the development of
coastal tourist settlements. IEEE 2011:156--61. Prata AJ. Land surface
temperatures derived from the advanced very high resolution radiometer
and the along-track scanning radiometer 2. Experimental results and
validation of AVHRR algorithms. J Geophys Res 1994;99:13,025--58.
Prihodko L, Goward SN. Estimation of air temperature from remotely
sensed surface observations* 1. Remote Sens Environ 1997;60:335--46.
Reed BC, Brown JF, VanderZee D, Loveland TR, Merchant JW, Ohlen DO.
Measuring phenological variability from satellite imagery. J Veg Sci
1994;5:703--14. Rosenzweig C, Solecki WD, Slosberg R. Mitigating New
York City's heat island with urban forestry, living roofs, and light
surfaces. A report to the New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority; 2006. Saaroni H, Ben-Dor E, Bitan A, Potchter O. Spatial
distribution and microscale characteristics of the urban heat island in
Tel-Aviv, Israel. Landsc Urban Plan 2000;48:1-18. Saez M, Sunyer J,
Castellsague J, MURILLO C, Anto JM. Relationship between weather
temperature and mortality: a time series analysis approach in Barcelona.
Int J Epidemiol 1995;24:576. Snyder WC, Wan Z, Zhang Y, Feng YZ.
Classiﬁcation-based emissivity for land surface temperature measurement
from space. Int J Remote Sens 1998;19:2753--74. Stoll M, Brazel A.
Surface--air temperature relationships in the urban environment of
Phoenix, Arizona. Phys Geogr 1992;13:160--79. Tucker CJ. Red and
photographic infrared linear combinations for monitoring vegetation.
Remote Sens Environ 1979;8:127--50. USCB. United States Census Bureau of
2000. US Census Bureau; 2000.

92

I. Kloog et al. / Science of the Total Environment 432 (2012) 85--92

Vancutsem C, Ceccato P, Dinku T, Connor SJ. Evaluation of MODIS land
surface temperature data to estimate air temperature in different
ecosystems over Africa. Remote Sens Environ 2010;114:449--65. Von Klot
S, Melly S, Coull B, Dutton J, Schwartz J. Daily temperature at
residence vs central measurements in eastern Massachusetts. Epidemiology
2008;19:S210. Von Klot S, Paciorek C, Melly S, Coull B, Dutton J,
Schwartz J. Association of temperature at residence vs central site
temperature with mortality in eastern Massachusetts--- a case crossover
analysis. Epidemiology 2009;20:S75. Voogt J, Oke T. Complete urban
surface temperatures. J Appl Meteorol 1997;36: 1117--32. Voogt J, Oke T.
Effects of urban surface geometry on remotely-sensed surface
temperature. Int J Remote Sens 1998;19:895--920. Voogt J, Oke T. Thermal
remote sensing of urban climates. Remote Sens Environ 2003;86:370--84.
Wan Z. MODIS land surface temperature products users' guide. Institute
for Computational Earth System Science (ICESS), University of
California, Santa Barbara; 2006. Wan Z. New reﬁnements and validation of
the MODIS land-surface temperature/emissivity products. Remote Sens
Environ 2008;112:59--74. Wan Z, Dozier J. A generalized split-window
algorithm for retrieving land-surface temperature from space. IEEE Trans
Geosci Remote Sens 1996;34:892--905.

Wan Z, Zhang Y, Zhang Q, Li Z. Validation of the land-surface
temperature products retrieved from Terra Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer data. Remote Sens Environ 2002;83:163--80. Wang W,
Liang S, Meyers T. Validating MODIS land surface temperature products
using long-term nighttime ground measurements. Remote Sens Environ
2008;112: 623--35. Wellenius GA, Schwartz J, Mittleman MA. Particulate
air pollution and hospital admissions for congestive heart failure in
seven United States cities. Am J Cardiol 2006;97:404--8. Weng Q. Thermal
infrared remote sensing for urban climate and environmental studies:
methods, applications, and trends. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens
2009;64: 335--44. Yang X, Li C, Zhang Z. A remote sensing method for
studying urban heat island. Proceedings of the ﬁrst international
airborne remote sensing conference and exhibition held in Strasbourg,
France; 1994. p. 261--71. Zanobetti A, Schwartz J. Temperature and
mortality in nine US cities. Epidemiology 2008;19:563. Zeger SL, Thomas
D, Dominici F, Samet JM, Schwartz J, Dockery D, et al. Exposure
measurement error in time-series studies of air pollution: concepts and
consequences. Environ Health Perspect 2000;108:419--26.


