Chronobiology International, 25(1): 65--81, (2008) Copyright # Informa
Healthcare ISSN 0742-0528 print/1525-6073 online DOI:
10.1080/07420520801921572

LIGHT AT NIGHT CO-DISTRIBUTES WITH INCIDENT BREAST BUT NOT LUNG CANCER
IN THE FEMALE POPULATION OF ISRAEL

Itai Kloog,1 Abraham Haim,2 Richard G. Stevens,3 Micha Barchana,4,5 and
Boris A. Portnov1 1

Department of Natural Resources & Environmental Management, University
of Haifa, Haifa, Israel 2 Department of Biology, University of
Haifa-Oranim, Kiryat Tivon, Israel 3 University of Connecticut Health
Center, Farmington, Connecticut, USA 4 School of Public Health,
University of Haifa, Haifa 5 Israel National Cancer Registry, Ministry
of Health, Jerusalem, Israel

Recent studies of shift-working women have reported that excessive
exposure to light at night (LAN) may be a risk factor for breast cancer.
However, no studies have yet attempted to examine the co-distribution of
LAN and breast cancer incidence on a population level with the goal to
assess the coherence of these earlier findings with population trends.
Coherence is one of Hill's “criteria” (actually, viewpoints) for an
inference of causality. Nighttime satellite images were used to estimate
LAN levels in 147 communities in Israel. Multiple regression analysis
was performed to investigate the association between LAN and breast
cancer incidence rates and, as a test of the specificity of our method,
lung cancer incidence rates in women across localities under the
prediction of a link with breast cancer but not lung cancer. After
adjusting for several variables available on a population level, such as
ethnic makeup, birth rate, population density, and local income level, a
strong positive association between LAN intensity and breast cancer rate
was revealed ( p , 0.05), and this association strengthened ( p , 0.01)
when only statistically significant factors were filtered out by
stepwise regression analysis. Concurrently, no association was found
between LAN intensity and lung cancer rate. These results provide
coherence of the previously reported case-control and cohort studies
with the codistribution of LAN and breast cancer on a population basis.
The analysis yielded an estimated 73% higher breast cancer incidence in
the highest LAN exposed

Submitted November 7, 2007, Returned for revision December 21, 2007,
Accepted January 9, 2008 Address correspondence to Prof. Boris A.
Portnov, Faculty of Social Sciences, Department of Natural Resources &
Environmental Management, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa,
Israel 31905. Tel.: 972-4-828-8532; Fax: 972-4-824-9971;. E-mail:
portnov@nrem.haifa.ac.il

65

66

I. Kloog et al. communities compared to the lowest LAN exposed
communities. (Author correspondence: portnov@nrem.haifa.ac.il) Keywords
Breast cancer, Light at night, Melatonin Lung cancer

INTRODUCTION A recent theory (Davis et al., 2001; Pauley, 2004; Stevens,
1987, 2005) states that excessive exposure to light at night (LAN)
increases breast cancer risk. A variety of mechanisms have been
proposed, including suppression of melatonin secretion by the pineal
gland leading to increased tumor growth (Blask et al., 2005), effects on
immune and thermoregulatory functions (Haim et al., 2005; Nelson, 2004),
and/or direct disruption of clock gene function in the suprachiasmatic
nuclei (SCN; biological clock) leading to alterations in cell cycle
regulation in breast tissue (Stevens & Rea, 2001; Stevens et al., 2007).
In contrast to breast cancer, lung cancer has a known dominant cause,
smoking, which accounts for about 90% of cases (American Cancer Society
[ACS], 2006). Currently, there is no evidence suggesting that LAN exerts
an effect on lung cancer development. The concentration of melatonin in
blood is normally high at night and low during the day (Wehr, 2001), and
its production by the pineal gland is driven by the SCN, which is in
turn influenced by the intensity, duration, and spectral power
distribution of the radiation on the non-image forming photoreceptors of
the retina (Brainard et al., 2001). Among the variety of its biological
actions, melatonin has oncostatic effects (Blask et al., 1992, 2003) and
may thus have an effect on the proliferation of cancer cells. In
particular, Blask et al. (2005) demonstrated LAN caused growth
enhancement of human breast tumor tissue in the nude rat model. Based on
cohort and case-control studies in specific subpopulations, the evidence
in support of LAN increasing the risk of breast cancer is limited but
generally supportive. Several predictions of the LAN theory have been
examined, including that shift-working women would be at higher risk
(Davis et al., 2001; Hansen, 2001; Lie et al., 2006; Schernhammer et
al., 2001); blind women (Hahn, 1991; Kliukiene et al., 2001; Verkasalo
et al., 1999) and long sleepers (Pinheiro et al., 2006; Verkasalo et
al., 2005) would be at lower risk; and light level in the bedroom at
night would be related to risk (Davis et al., 2001; O'Leary et al.,
2006). To date, the strongest and most consistent evidence is that women
with an occupational history of non-day shift work are at higher risk;
this has resulted in a classification of “shift work” as a 2A probable
human carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC; see Straif et al., 2007). The present study attempts to
investigate the link between local LAN level and incidence of breast and
lung cancer in women using cancer

Light at Night and Breast Cancer

67

rates and LAN intensity data available for 147 individual urban
localities in Israel. In particular, the present analysis attempts to
answer the question, Are the epidemiological studies among female shift
workers and blind women coherent with respect to the co-distribution of
breast cancer incidence of women and LAN levels in communities (i.e., at
the population level)? Such coherence is an important consideration in
the assessment of causality as proposed by Hill (1965). Hill describes
this attribute as the seventh of his nine viewpoints on what to consider
when attempting to infer the causality of an association between
environmental exposures and incidence of disease in populations. We
predicted an absence of a correlation between LAN and lung cancer,
because, as previously mentioned, there is no evidence suggesting that
LAN exerts any effect on the development of lung cancer. Thus, finding a
correlation between LAN and breast cancer, on the one hand, and no
correlation between LAN and lung cancer, on the other, in women would
constitute supportive evidence for the specificity of our analysis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS Israel as a Case Study Israel is a small and
densely populated country with a total land area of about 22,000 km2.
The majority of the country's population is concentrated around the
three major cities of Jerusalem, Tel-Aviv, and Haifa, where nearly 40%
of the country's population (7,100,000, as of 2006) reside.
Economically, the country is well developed with the Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) being USD 26,800 per capita, which is similar to that of
Greece, New Zealand, and South Korea (CIA, 2006). As in other developed
countries, Israel has high levels of LAN, caused by extremely high
population densities (ca. 300 residents per km2 overall) and the
above-mentioned geographic concentration of economic activities in a few
developed foci. This unevenness of geographic development and resulting
variability of LAN levels (see Figure 1) are considered an advantage of
the present study, because they provide us with localities characterized
by distinctively different LAN levels, thus increasing the intra-sample
variability of LAN exposure levels. (A color version of Figure 1 is
available in the online version of this article.) Three other
considerations are also relevant for the present analysis. Israel's
population is ethnically heterogeneous. It is composed of one major
ethnic group (Jews, both living locally for generations and immigrates
from around the world after the establishment of the State of Israel in
1948), plus a number of minority groups (Arabs, Druze, and Circassians).
With the exception of a few population centers (Jerusalem, Haifa, Acre,
and Ramle---cities with a mixed Jewish and Arab population), the urban
localities

68

I. Kloog et al.

FIGURE 1 LAN intensity levels (nanowatts/cm2/sr) according to nighttime
satellite image data (source: DMSP 2004).

in Israel are ethnically unmixed (i.e., either Jewish- or
Arab-populated). Overall, the Jewish population (i.e., 80% of the total
population) has higher income levels and higher rates of labor force
participation (about 52%, as opposed to about 37% among the Arabs).
Labor force participation is

Light at Night and Breast Cancer

69

especially low among minority women, which is explained by cultural and
family traditions. The Jewish population of Israel is ethnically
heterogeneous as well. The mass wave of immigration to Israel since 1948
has included large numbers of immigrants from North Africa and Asia.
Many of these immigrants found it difficult to adjust to life in the
Western-oriented society established by the founders of modern Israel
and, consequently, found themselves delegated to the lower
socio-economic strata of Israeli society. Regions populated
predominately by this category of former immigrants tend to have
relatively low income rates (Portnov & Erell, 2003). Breast cancer
incidence rates are higher in Jewish and more affluent communities
(Israeli Ministry of Health [IMOH], 2004), and there are substantial
differences in birth rates elsewhere, 37.2 new births per 1000 residents
in minority cities vs. 18.2 new births per 1000 residents (Israel
Central Bureau of Statistics [ICBS], 2004). Selection of Localities and
Dependent Variables This study and its conduct conformed to the ethical
standards of this journal (Touitou et al., 2006). Statistical data on
age-standardized rates per 100,000 population (ASR) of female breast and
lung cancer for the present analysis were obtained from the Israel
National Cancer Registry (IMOH, 2004). In this registry, such rates are
available only for localities of more than 5,000 residents. Therefore,
only 147 localities (i.e., all the localities above this population
threshold) were covered by the present study. For these localities, the
cancer rates in 1998--2001 were calculated per 100,000 residents
(age-standardized to the “world standard population,” as commonly done
in similar studies (Bray et al., 2004; Luke et al., 2006; Roychoudhuri
et al., 2006). In Israel, the population-based national cancer registry
covers the entire country, and completeness of the registry is greater
than 95%. There are more than 30 major medical facilities, both
governmental and public, that report to the registry. Cancer reporting
has been mandatory since 1982, and routine quality assurance
measurements are undertaken to ensure completeness and accuracy of the
registration cases (IMOH, 2004). LAN Data In order to represent the LAN
levels in the localities, a radiancecalibrated satellite image of
nighttime illumination in Israel was obtained from the U.S. Defense
Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP, 2004). The satellite image in
question reports average night-light intensity in 1996/97, measured in
light radiance units (i.e., nanowatts/cm2/sr). The image represents a
fraction of the light escaping into space and detected by the
satellite's sensors. Although these satellite measurements are a

70

I. Kloog et al.

magnitude lower than actual LAN levels detected on the ground, they
accurately represent the relative levels of night-light intensity
observed in the localities (see Figure 1). GIS Analysis In recent years,
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have become an important research
tool for cancer-related studies (Banerjee et al., 2003; Krieger et al.,
2002; Maheswaran et al., 2002; O'Leary et al., 2004; Scott et al.,
2002). In these studies, GIS are used, for example, to calculate the
distance between residences and hazardous waste sites, account for the
spatial clustering and variation of cancer cases, and capture
spatio-temporal heterogeneity in survival patterns. In the present
study, GIS technology was used for matching the layers of cancer rates
with local LAN levels obtained from satellite images, on the one hand,
and relevant socio-economic data (income levels, population size of
localities, etc.), on the other. GIS tasks were performed using the
“spatial join” tool in the ArcGIS 9 TM software (Minami et al., 2000).
The spatial join operation involves matching rows from different
geographic layers (i.e., maps) to the target layer based on the spatial
relationship between them. In the present study, LAN levels from the
satellite image were added to the target layer containing cancer rates
and relevant socio-economic data (income levels, population size of
localities, etc.). Statistical Analysis Statistical analysis of data was
performed in two phases. In the first phase, analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was applied to determine whether localities characterized by
different ground LAN intensities exhibited significantly different
cancer rates. To this end, the entire set of localities under study
(147) were split into three groups---low, medium, and high LAN exposure
localities---using the Jenks natural break method. The Jenks
classification determines the best arrangement of values into classes by
comparing the sum of squared differences of values from the means of
their classes. It thus identifies “break points” in the data values and
picks the class breaks that best group similar values and maximizes
differences between classes (Jenks, 1967; Minami et al., 2000). In the
second phase, ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analysis was used
to assess the association between age-standardized cancer rates and
local LAN intensities obtained from satellite image data. Because in our
dataset, the dependent variables (i.e., female breast and lung ASRs per
100,000 residents of a locality) were on the ratio scale, OLS regression
was the preferred analysis tool rather than the Poisson and logistic
regressions approaches commonly used in environmental studies and

Light at Night and Breast Cancer

71

are more suitable for count and categorical data (Long, 1997). The
analysis was performed separately for all cancer rates using the
following linear model: Cancer incidence rate ¼ constant þ B1 
ðmajority=minorityÞ þ B2  ð per capita incomeÞ þ B3  ðLANÞ þ B4  ð
population sizeÞ þ B5  ðbirth rateÞ þ B6  ð population densityÞ þ
ðrandom error termÞ where B1, . . ., B6 are regression coefficients.
During the analysis, several other functional forms of the model (e.g.,
log-linear and double-log forms) were tested, and only the results of
the best performing (linear) model are reported. To account for some
potential confounders, the following data were obtained from the Israel
Central Bureau of Statistic's annual report on Local Authorities in
Israel---Physical Data (ICBS 2004). Majority/Minority Composition In
Israel, there is a clear segregation between localities that allows one
to identify the makeup of the population. This is important because
cancer rates in the Jewish sector are much higher than among the
minority population (IMOH, 2004). Per Capita Income Per capita income is
a commonly used measure of population welfare that reflects differences
in the diet and lifestyle of different socio-economic strata. Several
previous studies indicated that cancer rates tend to be higher among
high than low-income strata (ACS, 2006; Bray et al., 2004). In addition,
the inclusion in the analysis of the per capita income variable helps to
differentiate between the different ethnic makeup within the Jewish
population. Population Size Thousands of residents typically encompass
the demography and economy of communities. Large, as opposed to small,
cities are often characterized by more ethnically heterogeneous
populations where there is greater physiological stress due to high
residential densities and traffic congestion. Population size of
localities may also serve as a proxy for the intensity of LAN that may
not be detected by satellite sensors, such as illumination inside public
buildings, public transportation, etc. The larger the population of a
locality, the greater the illumination in transportation and public
facilities. In theory, the intensity of LAN on a satellite map could
serve as a proxy measure for population density (MANTLE Project,

72

I. Kloog et al.

2007). Therefore, the density variable (the number of residents per km2
of built area of a locality) was added to the regression models to
examine such a possibility. Birth Rate Although birth rates (per 1,000)
of communities do not capture the full impact of reproductive factors
associated with breast cancer, high birth rates are known to be
negatively associated with breast cancer; multiple pregnancies reduce
breast cancer risk, while nulliparity tends to increase it (ACS, 2006).
The inclusion of the birth rate variable in the analysis thus attempts
to take the aspect of parity into account. During the analysis,
multicollinearity, normality, and homogeneity of variance assumptions
were tested, and the results were found satisfactory. The regression
residuals were also tested for the presence of spatial autocorrelation,
using Moran's I global autocollinearity test (Anselin, 1999), and no
significant spatial clustering of residuals was found. Analysis of Local
Spatial Autocorrelation In the present study, the analysis of Local
Spatial Autocorrelation (LSA) was used to detect the geographic
clustering of female breast cancer rates (female lung cancer was not
analyzed, as it is only used in the regression analysis as a control).
The Getis-Ord (Gi (d)) statistic, used to this end, is reported as
standard normal z-values and evaluates each point within a network of
sites, thus helping to determine the relationship between the values
observed around the target point and the global mean (Getis & Ord,
1992). This statistic is easy to interpret: a significant and positive
Gi (d) indicates that location i is surrounded by relatively large
values with respect to the global mean (i.e., “peak-value clusters”),
whereas a significant and negative Gi (d) indicates that location i is
surrounded by relatively small values (i.e., “dip-value clusters”).
RESULTS “Hotspot” Analysis The results of the LSA analysis are shown in
Figure 2. (A color version of Figure 2 is available in the onlive
version of this article.) The large red dots indicate clusters of
adjacent localities with very high breast cancer rates, while large
green dots symbolize clusters of adjacent localities with significantly
low (with respect to the global mean) values of breast cancer rates ( p
, 0.05). A clear clustering of significantly low breast cancer rates ( p
, 0.05) are apparent in the northern part of the country (see clusters
of

Light at Night and Breast Cancer

73

FIGURE 2 “Hotspot” analysis of breast cancer rates. Note: Red circles
mark clusters of adjacent localities with significantly high rates of
cancers (relative to the global mean), while green circles mark
geographic clusters of localities with significantly low cancer rates.

green dots in the upper right corner of the map). As the analysis
indicates, most of them are localities with a predominantly minority
population that are characterized by relatively low infrastructure
development and correspondingly relatively low LAN level. On average,
the LAN of localities with

74

I. Kloog et al.

minority populations is 11.70 nanowatts/cm2/sr, as opposed to Jewish
localities in which the average LAN is 26.34 nanowatts/cm2/sr. Clusters
of localities exhibiting significantly high rates of breast cancer are
evident. Most of these are located in the metropolitan areas of Tel Aviv
and Haifa (see the clusters of large red dots in the center and the
upper corner of the map), which have high urban infrastructure and
socio-economic development and may thus afford extensive illumination
systems (which themselves leak light to the outdoor surroundings) both
around public places and transportation nodes. This is consistent with
the average LAN values (see Figure 2). General Trends Table 1 reports
the average rates of breast and lung cancers across three groups of
localities characterized by different LAN levels as determined by
Jenks's natural break method (i.e, ,30 nanowatts/cm2/sr, low; 30 -- 55
nanowatts/cm2/sr, medium; and .55 nanowatts/cm2/sr, high). The average
cancer rates tend to increase in line with ground LAN intensity (70.31,
95.92, and 96.94 cases per 100,000 residents for female breast cancer
and 8.62, 11.25, and 15.05 for female lung cancer in the low, medium,
and high LAN groups, respectively). However, only for the breast cancer
rates are these differences statistically significant (Welch ¼ 32.158,
Brown-Forsythe ¼ 39.733, p , 0.001; see Table 1). Multivariate Analysis
Although the initial investigation demonstrated a significant increase
in breast cancer ASR in line with rising ground LAN levels (see Table
1), TABLE 1 Age-Standardized Rates of Female Breast and Lung Cancer per
100,000 Residents of Localities with Different Light at Night (LAN)
Intensities LAN intensity group of localities Low Medium High Equality
of group means tests Welch Brown-Forsythe

Breast cancer 70.31 95.92 96.94 32.158 (,0.001) 39.733 (,0.001)

Lung cancer 8.62 11.25 15.05 3.812 (0.04) 3.403 (0.07)

Method: ANOVA, Equality of group means test. Significance levels are in
parentheses. Group membership is determined by Jenks' natural break
method: ,30 nanowatts/cm2/sr (low); 30--55 nanowatts/cm2/sr (medium),
and .55 nanowatts/cm2/sr (high).

Light at Night and Breast Cancer

75

TABLE 2 Factors Affecting Female Breast and Lung Cancer Rates in
Localities Dependent variable Explanatory variable Constant
Majority/minority Per capita income LAN (Ln) Population size Birth rates
Density Number of observations† R2 R2 adjusted F

Breast (Ln)

Lung (Ln)

3.582 (14.244)§ 20.548 (25.874)§ 0.076 (2.314)§ 0.121 (1.932)‡ 22.41E-05
(20.040) 0.002 (0.704) 0.008 (0.966) 147 0.505 0.427 19.072§

2.059 (5.810)§ 20.198 (21.415) 0.045 (1.029) 20.013 (20.152) 3.77E-007
(0.518) 0.006 (1.435) 20.001 (20.093) 147 0.050 20.003 0.939

Method: ordinary least squares (OLS) regression; dependent variable:
cancer rates (Ln) per 100,000 residents.  Regression coefficient
(t-values are in parenthesis). † Number of valid observations,
list-wise. ‡ Significant at a p , 0.05 level, §significant at a p , 0.01
level. Abbreviations: breast ¼ breast cancer, lung ¼ lung cancer
(female).

ANOVA provides only the indication of the presence of such a
relationship, because it does not adjust for confounding or modifying
factors (e.g., differences in welfare level, population density, or
local birth rate). To examine the possibility that the result might
change if the aforementioned potential confounders are taken into
account, multiple regression analysis was conducted. Table 2 reports the
regression models in which ground LAN levels are controlled by the
ethnic makeup, population size of localities, population density, local
incomes, and local birth rate in assessing the association with female
breast cancer as well as lung cancer. The “breast cancer model” appears
to provide a reasonably good fit (R2 ¼ 0.505) in contrast to the lung
cancer model, in which the fit is very low (R2 ¼ 0.050). Importantly,
the breast cancer model also has a high degree of generality (F ¼
19.072, p , 0.001). As Table 2 shows, only the breast cancer rates are
positively associated with LAN (B ¼ 0.121, t ¼ 1.932, p , 0.05), while
the lung cancer rates are not (B ¼ 20.013, t ¼ 20.152, ns). Per capita
income is also positively associated with age-standardized breast cancer
rates (t ¼ 2.314, p , 0.001), indicating that wealthy localities
exhibit, ceteris paribus, higher rates of breast cancer.
Majority/minority population composition was negatively associated only
with female breast cancer (t ¼ 25.784, p , 0.001), indicating that the
minority group (non-Jewish population) tends to exhibit lower rates of
breast cancer, a finding that is in agreement with previous studies of
cancer in Israel (IMOH, 2004).

76

I. Kloog et al. TABLE 3 Factors Affecting Breast Cancer Rates in
Localities t†

B

Variable

Significant variables (variables in the model) Constant 3.748
Majority/minority 20.547 LAN (Ln) 0.141 Per capita income 0.057 Number
of observations# 147 0.444 R2 R2 adjusted 0.432 F 38.033§ Insignificant
variables (excluded variables) Population size Birth rates Density

19.181§ -6.083§ 2.788§ 1.980‡

0.342ns 0.707ns 1.015ns

Method: stepwise regression; dependent variable: female breast cancer
rates (ln) per 100,000 residents.  Regression coefficient. † t Values.
‡ Significant at a p , 0.05 level, §significant at a p , 0.01 level. #
Number of valid observations, list-wise. NS ¼ not significant.

Although the multicollinearity of variables in the analysis was tested
and found within tolerable limits (tolerance , 1.8), even this
relatively low level of multicollinearity may bias regression estimates.
Therefore, we used the stepwise multiple regression (SMR) method to
include only statistically significant variables in the resulting model.
The results are reported in Table 3. As the model shows, three variables
(i.e., majority/minority compostion, LAN, and per capita income) emerged
as statistically significant ( p , 0.05). As in the previous OLS model
(see Table 2), breast cancer rates are positively associated with LAN (B
¼ 0.141, t ¼ 2.788, p , 0.01), higher in wealthy localities (B ¼ 0.057,
t ¼ 1.980, p , 0.05) and lower in minority (B ¼ 20.547, t ¼ 26.083, p ,
0.01) population localities. Notably, other TABLE 4 Change in Female
Breast Cancer Age-Standardized Rates as a Function of Rising Ground LAN
Intensity (Model Sensitivity Test)

Minimum Average Maximum

LAN

Breast cancer rate

% Change

2.26 20.63 112.01

60.88 83.26 105.56

--- 36.75 26.79

Note. Based on the model reported in Table 3.LAN values are in
nanowatts/cm2/sr; breast cancer values are per 100,000 residents. The
values of the fixed variables are set as follows: average per capita
income NIS$4363 (average value for all localities under study) and
majority/minority¼0 (Jewish towns).

Light at Night and Breast Cancer

77

controls, such as population size, birth rates, and population density,
are filtered out as statistically insignificant ( p . 0.05; see Table
3). As Table 4 shows, with the values of all other controlled variables
(see Table 3) fixed, the observed increase in LAN level from 2.26
nanowatts/ cm2/sr (minimum LAN exposure) to 20.63 nanowatts/cm2/sr
(average LAN exposure) in the sample of localities corresponds to an
increase of 37% in female breast cancer ASR. DISCUSSION The hypothesis
that LAN increases risk of breast cancer causation is consistent with
the prediction that blind women would be at reduced risk and
shift-working women would be at high risk; studies so far support these
predictions (Davis et al., 2001; Feychting et al., 1998; Hahn, 1991;
Hansen, 2001; Kliukiene et al., 2001; Lie et al., 2006; Schernhammer et
al., 2001, 2006; Verkasalo et al., 1999). Although the studies conducted
thus far appear to suggest that excessive exposure to LAN by women is
associated with elevated risk of developing breast cancer, this
conclusion must be coherent with the observed co-distribution of LAN and
breast cancer on the population level. The aim of the present research
was to test two predictions at the general population level: that there
would be a link between LAN exposure and the incidence of female breast
cancer, and that there would not be a link to female lung cancer. Lung
cancer was chosen as a “negative control” to assess the specificity of
the analytic approach. The results supported both predictions. As
described in the methods and results sections, local income level was
adjusted for because income is associated with risk of breast cancer
(ACS, 2006; Bray et al., 2004; Snell, 1995). It is not clear what aspect
of income or affluence is causal of this association. In regard to the
LAN theory, income may serve in part as a proxy for artificial light
intensity inside households. For instance, high socio-economic groups
may be less concerned than lower socio-economic groups with high
electricity costs and thus use more illumination in their houses
(Gram-Hanssen & Petersen, 2004). The satellite data provided us with
ambient, LAN levels external to inside the home. Both LAN levels and
local income were positively associated with risk of breast cancer.
Similarly, population size of localities may serve in part as a proxy
for the intensity of LAN that may not be detected by satellite sensors,
such as illumination inside public buildings, in public transportation,
etc. The larger the population of a locality, the greater the
illumination in transportation and public facilities. Due to the
limitation of the data availability, occupation, reproductive delay,
alcohol consumption, smoking, and other potentially important risk
factors were not included in the analysis, although the per capita
income variable may have captured some of their effects. In general,
environmental health problems can be approached at four different
levels: the micro-level, individual level, population level, and

78

I. Kloog et al.

ecosystem level (Pearce, 1996). Each level has its own strengths and
weaknesses. While micro- and individual-level studies tend to be more
accurate and sensitive, population and ecological level studies are
pivotal in defining the key public health problems that ought to be
addressed (Pekkanen & Pearce, 2001). In many cases, environmental health
problems are better addressed by large-scale, population-based
investigations than individual-level investigations due to the
occurrence of a large number of lowlevel exposures (Pekkanen & Pearce,
2001). However, a substantial drawback of population-based studies is
those associations that occur at an aggregated level may be subject to
ecological confounding or fallacy (Portnov et al., 2007; Robinson, 1958;
Selvin, 1958). Several techniques were used to reduce the possibility of
ecological confounding: separate analyses were performed for
sub-populations (grouping by ethnic origin) and adjusted for some
potential confounders (Elliot et al., 1996; Morgenstern & Thomas, 1993),
including income level, ethnic makeup of localities, and birth rate.
Because the results of the present study are location-specific, future
studies should include a comparison of these results to those obtained
in other countries with similar geographic and socio-demographic
characteristics, thus validating the generality of the present findings.
Furthermore, in order to assess the importance of photoperiod regimes on
human seasonal adaptations, it may be desirable to compare the present
results with those of follow-up studies conducted in countries
characterized by extreme differences in seasonal photoperiod regimes.
Using finer spatial grid for ground LAN intensities (e.g., higher
resolution satellite images and in situ measurements) is another needed
addition to our research. With such high-resolution data, it is possible
to do a more precise analysis of association between LAN levels and
hormone-dependent cancer rates (down to individual LAN exposure levels).
The addition of more potential confounders (e.g., smoking, alcohol
consumption) to the multivariate analysis should also be considered. The
link between LAN exposure and female breast cancer rates found in this
study, as well as absence of link to female lung cancer, further
strengthens previous studies concerning the relation between LAN and
breast cancer in women by providing evidence of coherence as described
by Hill (1965). This conclusion must be viewed in light of the known
impacts of illumination on melatonin production and secretion by the
pineal gland, its relation to a variety of hormones that are involved in
the development of breast cancer (Pauley, 2004; Reiter, 1991; Stevens,
2005), and the limitations of population-based studies outlined in the
previous sections.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful to Dr. Chris Elvidge of NOAA
National Geophysical Data Center in Boulder, Colorado, USA, for his help
with

Light at Night and Breast Cancer

79

interpretation of the DMSP nightlight data. RGS was supported by grant
ES11659 from the U.S. National Institutes of Health. REFERENCES ACS.
(2006). Breast cancer risk factors and prevention. Retrieved June 15,
2006 http://www.cancer.org. Anselin L. (1999). Spatial econometrics.
Dallas, Tex.: Bruton Center, School of Social Sciences, University of
Texas at Dallas. Banerjee S, Wall MM, Carlin BP. (2003). Frailty
modeling for spatially correlated survival data, with application to
infant mortality in Minnesota. Biostatistics 4:123--142. Blask DE,
Lemus-Wilson AM, Wilson ST. (1992). Breast cancer: a model system for
studying the neuroendocrine role of pineal melatonin in oncology.
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 20:309--311. Blask DE, Dauchy RT, Sauer LA, Krause
JA, Brainard GC. (2003). Growth and fatty acid metabolism of human
breast cancer (MCF-7) xenografts in nude rats: impact of constant
light-induced nocturnal melatonin suppression. Breast Cancer Res. Treat.
79:313-- 320. Blask DE, Brainard GC, Dauchy RT, Hanifin JP, Davidson LK,
Krause JA, Sauer LA, Rivera-Bermudez MA, Dubocovich ML, Jasser SA, Lynch
DT, Rollag MD, Zalatan F. (2005). Melatonin-depleted blood from
premenopausal women exposed to light at night stimulates growth of human
breast cancer xenografts in nude rats. Cancer Res. 65:11174 --11184.
Brainard GC, Hanifin JP, Greeson JM, Byrne B, Glickman GE, Gerner E,
Rollag MD. (2001). Action spectrum for melatonin regulation in humans:
evidence for a novel circadian photoreceptor. J. Neurosci. 21:6405--
6412. Bray F, McCarron P, Parkin DM. (2004). The changing global
patterns of female breast cancer incidence and mortality. Breast Cancer
Res. 6:229--239. CIA. (2006). CIA World Factbook. Retrieved in November
2006 from http://www.cia.gov//index.html. Davis S, Mirick DK, Stevens
RG. (2001). Night shift work, light at night, and risk of breast cancer.
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 93:1557--1562. DMSP. (2004). DMSP Nighttime lights
data download. Retrieved in January 2006 from http://
www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/index.html. Elliot P, Cuzick J, English D, Stern
R. (eds.). (1996). Geographical and Environmental Epidemiology: Methods
for Small Area Studies. New York: Oxford University Press, 404 pp.
Feychting M, Osterlund B, Ahlbom A. (1998). Reduced cancer incidence
among the blind. Epidemiology 9:490--494. Getis A, Ord JK. (1992). The
analysis of spatial association by use of distance statistics.
Geographical Anal. 24:189--206. Gram-Hanssen K, Petersen NK. (2004).
Different Everyday Lives---Different Patterns of Electrical Use. ACEEE
Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings 2004. Pacific Grove,
Calif.: ACEEE. Hahn RA. (1991). Profound bilateral blindness and the
incidence of breast cancer. Epidemiology 2:208--210. Haim A, Shanas U,
Zubidad AS, Scantelbry M. (2005). Seasonality and seasons out of
time---the thermoregulatory effects of light interference. Chronobiol.
Int. 22:57--64. Hansen J. (2001). Increased breast cancer risk among
women who work predominantly at night. Epidemiology 12:74-- 77. Hill AB.
(1965). The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc. R.
Soc. Med. 58:295--300. Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (2004).
Statistical Abstract of Israel. Jerusalem: Israel Central Bureau of
Statistics. IMOH. (2004). Geographical Mapping of Breast Cancer in
Israel: 1984--1999. Jerusalem: Israel Ministry of Health. Jenks GF.
(1967). The data model concept in statistical mapping. Israel National
Center Registry. In International Yearbook of Cartography 7. In
International Cartographic Association, (ed.), University of Ulm, ULM:
Germany, pp. 186--190. Kliukiene J, Tynes T, Andersen A. (2001). Risk of
breast cancer among Norwegian women with visual impairment. Br. J.
Cancer 84:397--399. Krieger N, Chen JT, Waterman PD, Soobader MJ,
Subramanian SV, Carson R. (2002). Geocoding and monitoring of US
socioeconomic inequalities in mortality and cancer incidence: does the
choice of

80

I. Kloog et al.

area-based measure and geographic level matter? The public health
disparities geocoding project. Am. J. Epidemiol. 156:471--482. Lie JA,
Roessink J, Kjaerheim K. (2006). Breast cancer and night work among
Norwegian nurses. Cancer Causes Control 17:39--44. Long JS. (1997).
Regression Models for Categorical and Limited Dependent Variables.
Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publications, 328 pp. Luke C, Priest K,
Roder D. (2006). Changes in incidence of in situ and invasive breast
cancer by histology type following mammography screening. Asian Pac. J.
Cancer Prev. 7:69--74. Maheswaran R, Strachan DP, Dodgeon B, Best NG.
(2002). A population-based case-control study for examining early life
influences on geographical variation in adult mortality in England and
Wales using stomach cancer and stroke as examples. Int. J. Epidemiol.
31:375--382. MANTLE Project. (2007). Mapping night-time light emissions
in the eu using satellite observed visiblenear infrared emissions as a
policy tool. Retrieved in June 2007 from http://www.mantleproject.com.
Minami M, Hatakeyama A, Mitchell A, Booth B, Payne B, Eicher C, Blades
E, Sims I, Bailey J, Brennan P, Stephens S. (2000). Using ArcMap: GIS.
Redlands, Calif: Environmental Systems Research Institute, 598 pp.
Morgenstern H, Thomas D. (1993). Principles of study design in
environmental epidemiology. Environ. Health Perspect. 101(Suppl.
4):23--38. Nelson RJ. (2004). Seasonal immune function and sickness
responses. Trends Immunol. 25:187-- 192. O'Leary ES, Vena JE,
Freudenheim JL, Brasure J. (2004). Pesticide exposure and risk of breast
cancer: A nested case-control study of residentially stable women living
on long Island. Environ. Res. 94: 134--144. O'Leary ES, Schoenfeld ER,
Stevens RG, Kabat GC, Henderson K, Grimson R, Gammon MD, Leske MC.
(2006). Shift work, light at night, and breast cancer on long Island,
New York. Am. J. Epidemiol. 164:358--366. Pauley SM. (2004). Lighting
for the human circadian clock: recent research indicates that lighting
has become a public health issue. Med. Hypotheses 63:588--596. Pearce N.
(1996). Traditional epidemiology, modern epidemiology, and public
health. Am. J. Public Health 86:678--683. Pekkanen J, Pearce N. (2001).
Environmental epidemiology: challenges and opportunities. Environ.
Health Perspect. 109:1--5. Pinheiro SP, Schernhammer ES, Tworoger SS,
Michels KB. (2006). A prospective study on habitual duration of sleep
and incidence of breast cancer in a large cohort of women. Cancer Res.
66: 5521-- 5525. Portnov BA, Erell E. (2003). Interregional Inequalities
in Israel: 1948--1995. Population and Housing Census Data. Jerusalem,
Israel: Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, 164 pp. Portnov BA, Dubnov
J, Barchana M. (2007). On ecological fallacy, assessment errors stemming
from misguided variable selection, and the effect of aggregation on the
outcome of epidemiological study. J. Exp. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol.
17:106--121. Reiter RJ. (1991). Pineal melatonin: cell biology of
synthesis and of its physiological interactions. Endocrine Rev.
12:151--180. Robinson WS. (1958). Ecological correlations and the
behavior of individuals. Am. Sociol. Rev. 15: 351--357. Roychoudhuri R,
Putcha V, Moller H. (2006). Cancer and laterality: a study of the five
major paired organs (UK). Cancer Causes Control 17:655--662.
Schernhammer ES, Laden F, Speizer FE, Willett WC, Hunter DJ, Kawachi I,
Colditz GA. (2001). Rotating night shifts and risk of breast cancer in
women participating in the nurses' health study. J. Natl. Cancer Inst.
93:1563--1568. Schernhammer ES, Kroenke CH, Laden F, Hankinson SE.
(2006). Night work and risk of breast cancer. Epidemiology 17:108--111.
Scott D, Curtis B, Twumasi FO. (2002). Towards the creation of a health
information system for cancer in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Health
Place 8:237--249. Selvin HC.. (1958). Durkheim's “suicide” and problems
of empirical research. Am. J. Sociol. 63:607-- 619. Snell RS.. (1995).
Clinical Anatomy for Medical Students. Boston: Little Brown & Company,
pp. 317 --319. Stevens RG. (1987). Electric power use and breast cancer:
a hypothesis. Am. J. Epidemiol. 125:556--561.

Light at Night and Breast Cancer

81

Stevens RG. (2005). Circadian disruption and breast cancer: from
melatonin to clock genes. Epidemiology 16:254--258. Stevens RG, Rea MS.
(2001). Light in the built environment: potential role of circadian
disruption in endocrine disruption and breast cancer. Cancer Causes
Control 12:279--287. Stevens RG, Blask DE, Brainard GC, Hansen J,
Lockley SW, Provencio I, Rea MS, Reinlib L. (2007). Meeting report: the
role of environmental lighting and circadian disruption in cancer and
other diseases. Environ. Health Perspect. 115:1357--1362. Straif K, Baan
R, Grosse Y, Secretan BE, Ghissassi FE, Bouvard V, Altieri A,
Benbrahim-Tallaa L, Cogliano V. (2007). Carcinogenicity of shift-work,
painting, and fire-fighting. Lancet Oncol. 8: 1065--1066. Touitou Y,
Smolensky MH, Portaluppi F. (2006). Ethics, standards, and procedures of
animal and human chronobiology research. Chronobiol. Int. 23:1083--1096.
Verkasalo PK, Pukkala E, Stevens RG, Ojamo M, Rudanko SL. (1999).
Inverse association between breast cancer incidence and degree of visual
impairment in Finland. Br. J. Cancer 80:1459--1460. Verkasalo PK,
Lillberg K, Stevens RG, Hublin C, Partinen M, Koskenvuo M, Kaprio J.
(2005). Sleep duration and breast cancer: a prospective cohort study.
Cancer Res. 65:595--600. Wehr T. (2001). Photoperiodism in humans and
other primates: evidence and implications. J. Biol. Rhythms 16:348--364.


