Remote Sensing of Environment 150 (2014) 132--139

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Remote Sensing of Environment journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/rse

Predicting spatiotemporal mean air temperature using MODIS satellite
surface temperature measurements across the Northeastern USA Itai Kloog
a,⁎, Francesco Nordio b, Brent A. Coull c, Joel Schwartz b a b c

Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva, Israel Department of
Environmental Health --- Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program,
Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Dr West,
Boston, MA 02215, USA Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, 02215, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history: Received 9 January 2014 Received in revised form 24
April 2014 Accepted 26 April 2014 Available online 21 May 2014 Keywords:
MODIS Surface temperature Air temperature Exposure error Epidemiology

a b s t r a c t Air temperature (Ta) stations have limited spatial
coverage, particularly in rural areas. Since temperature can vary
greatly both spatially and temporally, Ta stations are often inadequate
for studies on the health effects of extreme temperature and climate
change. Satellites can provide us with daily physical surface
temperature (Ts) measurements, enabling us to estimate daily Ta. In this
study, we aimed to extend our previous work on predicting Ta from Ts in
Massachusetts by predicting 24 h Ta means on a 1 km grid across the
Northeast and Mid-Atlantic states, extending both the temporal and
spatial coverage, improving upon the methodology and validating our
model in other geographical regions across the Northeastern part of the
USA. We used mixed model regressions to ﬁrst calibrate Ts and Ta
measurements, regressing Ta measurements against day-speciﬁc random
intercepts, and ﬁxed and random Ts slopes. Then to capture the ability
of neighboring cells to ﬁll in the cells with missing Ts values, we
regress the Ta predicted from the ﬁrst mixed effects model against the
mean of the Ta measurements on that day, separately for each grid cell.
Out-of-sample tenfold cross-validation was used to quantify the accuracy
of our predictions. Our model performance was excellent for both days
with available Ts and days without Ts observations (mean out-of-sample
R2 = 0.95 and R2 = 0.94 respectively). We demonstrate how Ts can be used
reliably to predict daily Ta at high resolution in large geographical
areas even in non-retrieval days while reducing exposure measurement
error. © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction Spatially distributed near-surface air temperature (Ta)
   is a commonly used and important variable in various scientiﬁc ﬁelds
   including climatology (Smith et al., 1988; Watson & Albritton, 2001),
   study of vector-borne disease (Garske, Ferguson, & Ghani, 2013;
   Goetz, Prince, & Small, 2000) environmental and ecological studies
   (Zanobetti & Schwartz, 2008), hydrological studies (Wang, Koike,
   Yang, & Yeh, 2009) and many others. One particular ﬁeld of importance
   is epidemiology and public health. Multiple studies in recent years
   have shown that Ta plays an important role in epidemiological
   studies. This growing body of evidence clearly show that Ta has a
   strong association with adverse health outcomes, especially for
   cardiovascular diseases (Halonen, Zanobetti, Sparrow, Vokonas, &
   Schwartz, 2010; Medina-Ramón, Zanobetti, Cavanagh, & Schwartz, 2006;
   Ren et al., 2011). Since temperature can vary greatly both spatially
   and temporally, Ta stations with limited spatial coverage are often
   inadequate for such epidemiological studies looking at extreme
   temperature (both warm and cold) and climate change. Changes in
   climate will lead to warmer temperatures and more extreme weather
   events, which are associated with increased morbidity ⁎ Corresponding
   author. Tel.: +972 8 6428394. E-mail address: ekloog@hsph.harvard.edu
   (I. Kloog).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2014.04.024 0034-4257/© 2014 Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

and mortality in sensitive populations (Ostro, Roth, Green, & Basu,
2009), both in heat waves and less extreme events (Basu, Feng, & Ostro,
2008; Ostro et al., 2009; Zanobetti & Schwartz, 2008). Most of the
epidemiological studies on health effects of temperature have been
conducted using large geographical areas as units of the analysis
(state, nationwide), thus potentially biasing the health effects risks
estimates due to exposure measurement error (i.e., assigning inaccurate
exposure to each study participant) (Zeger et al., 2000). Ta is commonly
measured at a reference height of 2 m above the ground in most weather
stations (NCDC, 2010), which are dependent on the regional
infrastructure for weather data collection. These measurements that are
collected as point samples are not optimal for capturing the spatial
variability of the climatic conditions within each region (Vancutsem,
Ceccato, Dinku, & Connor, 2010). The spatial information available on
air temperature is thus often very limited, especially where the
monitoring density is low (such as rural areas), since Ta is affected by
properties that vary greatly in both space and time (Prihodko & Goward,
1997). These “out of coverage” rural areas lack detailed unbiased Ta
readings and people who live in more densely populated areas are
unlikely to be representative of those who do not. Ta sites cannot
measure high spatial resolution exposure for epidemiology studies, which
introduces exposure error, and likely biases the health effect estimates
downward (Zeger et al., 2000). In addition, the urban heat

I. Kloog et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 150 (2014) 132--139

island effect results in temperature variations over large spatial
scales in urban areas depending on the relative amounts of hard surface
versus green space. This lack of high resolution continuous
spatio-temporal measurements, has resulted in studies looking into
methods for addressing this lack of data. Some studies have looked at
interpolation techniques such as global interpolators, kriging and
inverse density weighting (IDW) among others (Florio, Lele, Chang,
Sterner, & Glass, 2004; Vicente-Serrano, Saz-Sánchez, & Cuadrat, 2003;
Yang, Wang, & August, 2004). Vicente-Serrano et al. (2003) presents a
detailed comparative analysis predicting temperature and precipitation
from various statistical methods including multiple interpolation
methods (such as kriging, co-kriging, and global interpolators). The
study is conducted in an area with signiﬁcant geographic differences and
spatial climatic diversity (the middle Ebro Valley in the northeast of
Spain). The accuracy of their comprehensive temperature analysis varied
greatly ranging from R2 = 0.39 for the co-kriging analysis and up to R2
= 0.75 for the regression-based method. They conclude by stating that
though there were small differences in estimation accuracy between the
ﬁnal regression model and the maps obtained from local interpolations,
it is preferable to use the empirical regression model since it provides
a more accurate reﬂection of thermal diversity at a local scale. In
addition, regression-based methods are not as conditioned by the
location of the Ta stations as local and geostatistical methods are,
which give better predictions in areas with low spatial density of
available data. Florio et al. (2004) also looked at different spatially
dependent (kriging) models and multiple linear regressions to model Ta.
Their results show that the kriging models predicted temperature better
than the multiple regression models (0.9C error). They do state however,
that incorporating satellite data in their kriging models would result
in better model performance under optimal day conditions. These
station-based interpolation techniques suffer from arbitrary locations
of weather stations (Lennon & Turner, 1995) and often lack continuous
daily data accessibility. Satellite surface temperature data (Ts) is
deﬁned as the skin temperature of the ground, which is the actual
reading from surface level which the satellite “sees” when it looks
through the atmosphere to the ground. Ts data can provide actual
physical measurements across the entire study area which can improve
daily Ta predictions. In recent years researchers have started using
satellite-based methods due to the ability to get spatial estimates of
Ts at high temporal (daily) and spatial resolution (1 km) (Vancutsem et
al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2013; Zhu, Lű, & Jia, 2013). Whereas Ta
measurements provide point data at a relatively coarse resolution,
satellite based Ts data can be used for a spatially continuous and high
resolution view of the land Ts. The ability to obtain both high spatial
and temporal resolutions Ts data is a signiﬁcant advantage of satellite
observations over traditional climatic methods. Several studies
correlated daytime Ts satellite observations with Ta at ground
meteorological stations across non-urban areas. Most of the studies
focus on predicting minimum Ta. Dousset (Dousset, 1989), has shown that
Ts correlations with Ta are signiﬁcantly better during the night since
microscale advection is reduced. During the day hours when there is
direct solar illumination, additional factors lead to more complex
interaction between Ta and Ts including sky view factor, thermal
properties of the underlined surfaces, satellite--sun geometry, surface
geometry, and weather conditions. Both Fu et al. (2011) and Vancutsem et
al. (2010) explored estimating Ta using MODIS Ts data with moderate
success. For example in Fu's study a moderate predictive accuracy was
presented (R2 N 0.55, p b 0.01). Recently, Zhu et al. (2013) explored
estimating daily maximum and minimum Ta using MODIS Ts. In order to
improve the accuracy of the estimation of daily maximum Ta, they used
the temperature--vegetation index (TVX) method and applied it to improve
the daily maximum Ta accuracy. They report a RMSE value of 3.79 °C and
model ﬁts (R2) of 0.83. Comparisons in urban areas have been few.

133

All previous studies either lack complete spatial and temporal
predictions, present relatively low predictive power or do not predict
daily 24 hour mean Ta predictions. We recently published a study (Kloog,
Chudnovsky, Koutrakis, & Schwartz, 2012) on the temporal and spatial
assessment of minimum Ta using MODIS Ts measurements in Massachusetts,
USA. We generated daily Ta predictions for 2003 even when Ts data was
unavailable. Our model performance was excellent for both days with
available Ts and days without Ts observations (mean out-of-sample R2 =
0.95 and R2 = 0.94 respectively). A key difference from the previous
approaches was the use of a mixed model allowing the regression
coefﬁcient between Ts and Ta to vary by day, resulting in considerably
higher R2. In this paper we extend our previous work (Kloog et al.,
2012) in Massachusetts by looking at predicting 24 h Ta means based on
both night and day Ts data, extending both the temporal and spatial
coverage of the model, improving upon the methodology and validating our
model across the Northeastern part of the USA. Speciﬁcally, we developed
new methodologies to better predict Ta over a large areas taking into
account the considerable differences in such large geographical regions
(covering the entire Northeast and Mid-Atlantic areas of the USA) while
predicting mean 24 h Ta as opposed to minimum air temperature in our
previous model. We also examine performance for day and night
temperatures, and incorporate monitored Ta within 60 km buffers around
each grid cell to ﬁll in for days with missing Ts. We incorporate land
use regression, and meteorological variables to predict daily 24 h mean
Ta for grid cells even when satellite Ts measures are not available. 2.
Methods 2.1. Study domain Our study region included the entire
Northeastern part of the USA (Fig. 1), and includes many urban areas
(notably New York, Boston, Washington, DC and Philadelphia) and rural
towns, large forested regions, water bodies, mountains and the Atlantic
sea shoreline. 2.2. Surface temperature and emissivity We obtained daily
Ts data from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)
satellite (Terra), with a spatial resolution of 1 × 1 km. We used the
MOD11\_A1 product (Terra land surface temperature & emissivity) used in
many previous studies (Kloog et al., 2012; Wan, 2008) since its product
is publicly available, provides daily Ts at a high spatial resolution
and covers large areas across the USA. Emissivity was obtained since
it's a parameter that can inﬂuence Ts measurements by causing a
reduction of surface-emitted radiance. In addition, the anisotropy of
reﬂectivity and emissivity may reduce or increase the total radiance
from the surface (Weng, Lu, & Schubring, 2004). Emissivity is available
in the MODIS MOD11\_A1 product. The radiometric temperature was
corrected for atmospheric transmission to account for the kinetic
temperature of the object using the following formula (Jensen, 2009):
1=4

T kin ¼ T rad =EmmisivityðλÞ

where Tkin is related to the true kinetic temperature (and further
denoted here as Ts) and Trad is the radiant temperature of an object
recorded by a remote sensor. More details about MODIS Ts data can be
found in previous papers (Kloog et al., 2012; Wan, 2008). 2.3.
Meteorological data Daily data for Ta across the Northeast U.S. for
2000--2011 were obtained from two sources: The National Climatic Data
Center (NCDC) and Weather underground Inc. (WU). The spatial coverage of
NCDC stations was lacking (325 stations across all study area) and thus
to

134

I. Kloog et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 150 (2014) 132--139

Fig. 1. Map of the study area showing all available weather underground
and NCDC Air temperature monitor stations across Northeastern USA for
2000--2011.

improve the spatial coverage of Ta monitors we added the WU Ta stations
to our analysis (which added additional 2535 stations). WU is a
commercial provider of weather information services that incorporates a
network of personal weather stations. These sources have been used in
multiple studies in the past few years (Kloog et al., 2012; Von Klot,
Melly, Coull, Dutton, & Schwartz, 2008). There were between 513 and 2860
daily monitors (monitors increase yearly) operating across the study
area during the study period (see Fig. 1). To check differences in
measurements that might result in biases, we validate the WU data
comparing it to the NCDC stations by matching each of the WU stations to
the closest NCDC station within 1 km, and computed the correlations. The
average correlation (R2) was 0.958, suggesting that the use of WB and WU
stations is unlikely to cause bias. 2.4. Spatial predictors of air
temperature To improve the predictive ability of the ﬁnal constructed
model, the following spatial predictors were used in our models:

normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), percent urban and
elevation. NDVI: We used the publicly available monthly MODIS NDVI
product (MOD13A3) at 1 km spatial resolution. The monthly resolution was
chosen since NDVI values do not change considerably each month.
Elevation: elevation data were added through a satellite based DEM
(digital elevation model) from the National Elevation Dataset (NED)
(Maune, 2007). NED data is publicly available from the U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS) and contains elevation data across the United States at a
spatial resolution of 1 arc sec. Arc seconds were aggregated up so that
each 1 × 1 km elevation cell represents the mean of that cell. There are
sharp elevation contrasts across such a large study area and thus we
used elevation as a spatial predictor (generally higher elevations are
associated with lower air temperatures). Percent urban: We used the
national land cover data (NLCD) from 2001 (Homer, Huang, Yang, Wylie, &
Coan, 2004), available as raster

I. Kloog et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 150 (2014) 132--139

ﬁles with a 30 m spatial resolution. We used values classiﬁed as built
areas (NLCD values for developed low intensity, developed medium
intensity and developed high intensity) to calculate the percent of
urban areas in each 1 × 1 km grid across the study area. 2.5.
Statistical methods Our Ta predictions are generated by a series of
statistical models. We start by calibrating daily Ts in each grid cell
for which both Ta and Ts values are available (model 1). Each Ta
stations is assigned the closest Ts observation on that speciﬁc day
(within a distance of 1 km). On each day we estimate a separate slope in
the relationship between Ta and Ts to capture the day to day temporal
variability of the relationship. Random slopes are used rather than
separate slopes for each day because random slopes are shrinkage
estimates that reduce what otherwise could be excessive noise in day
speciﬁc slopes. We performed the calibrations with both day and night
MODIS Ts separately. Since results were almost identical (see Appendix
A) we choose to use the night Ts as the main predictor since the quality
of data is generally better. During nighttime, the earth surface behaves
almost as an isothermal and homogeneous surface. In contrast, during
daytime there is a signiﬁcant directional anisotropy effect which is due
to differences in sun illumination vs. satellite viewing geometry and
different shading effects within pixels, giving rise to temperature
differences as much as 20 °C (Wan & Dozier, 1996). In model 1 we ﬁt a
mixed model regression with dayspeciﬁc random intercepts and Ts slopes
as follows:     Taij ¼ α þ u j þ β1 þ v j Tsij þ β2 Percent urbani þ
β3 Elevationi 

þ β4 NDVIij þ εij  u j v j  ½ðo oÞ; Σ 

135

We then make use of the model 1 ﬁt to predict Ta in grid cells without
Ta measurements but with available daily Ts satellite measurements. Ts
values are not available in all grid/day combinations (due to retrieval
errors, snow, clouds etc.) and thus this step often fails to provide
predictions for many grid cell-day combinations. To estimate Ta when no
Ts data are available we ﬁt a second model (model 2) which uses the
association of predicted grid cells Ta values (based on satellite Ts)
with surrounding Ta monitors and the association with values in
neighboring grid cells. Since daily Ta for the whole of the Northeast
varies considerably between different geographical regions, we built 60
km buffers around each Ta monitor. We then use the daily mean Ta in each
buffer as a predictor of temperature in all cells that fell within the
buffer. This parameter denoted mTajr is the mean Ta across the speciﬁc
buffer r on a day j. In contrast to the ﬁrst model, the second model
includes a cell speciﬁc ﬁxed slope and intercept: PredTaij ¼ α i þ βi
mTajr þ ε ij where PredTaij is the predicted Ta at a spatial site i on a
day j from the ﬁrst prediction model; mTajr is the mean Ta across the
speciﬁc buffer r on a day j; α are the ﬁxed intercepts and β1 are the
ﬁxed slopes that varies by spatial site i. Statistical Analysis was
performed in R (version 2.15) and SAS© (version 9.3). These coefﬁcients
were then used to ﬁll in the predicted Taij on days when the satellite
data was missing and no monitoring data was available in these grid
cells. Finally we ran several sensitivity analyses for a sample year
(2011) to see how the ﬁnal model predictions perform in smaller
geographic regions (such as single states and cities) and in urban areas
vs. rural areas. We also ran all years to check the models performance
at different time periods (summer vs. winter). 3. Results

where: Taij is the measured Ta at a spatial site i on a day j; α and uj
are the ﬁxed and random intercepts, respectively, Tsij is the Ts value
in the grid cell corresponding to site i on a day j; β1 and vj are the
ﬁxed and random slopes, respectively. Percent urban is the percent of
urban area in the gird cell, NDVIij is the monthly NDVI value in the
grid cell corresponding to site i for the month in which day j falls.
Elevationi is the mean elevation in the grid cell corresponding to site
i. Finally, Σ is an unstructured variance--covariance matrix for the
random effects and εij is the error term at site i on a day j. We used
ten-fold out of sample cross validation (CV) to validate our predictions
at monitor locations at each step. We randomly divide our data into 90
and 10% splits ten times. We predict for the 10% data sets using the
model ﬁtted from the remaining 90% of the data. We then report these
computed R2 values. To test our results for bias we regress the measured
Ta values against the predicted values in each site on each day. We
estimated the model prediction precision by taking the square root of
the mean squared prediction errors (RMSPE) as follows: RMSPE ¼

N

−1

N X 2 ðPi−OiÞ

!0:5

i¼1

where: N is the number of observations, Oi is the ith observed value and
Pi is the ith predicted value. In addition we estimated prediction
errors separately for the temporal and spatial components of the model.
Temporal R2 was calculated by regressing Delta Ta against Delta
predicted: Delta Ta  Delta predicted where: Delta Ta is the difference
between the actual Ta in place i at time j and the annual mean Ta at
that location, and Delta predicted is deﬁned similarly for the predicted
values generated from the model. Spatial R2 was calculated by regressing
the annual overall mean Ta against the mean predicted Ta at place i
(each monitoring location).

Fig. 2 shows how applying our daily calibration method approach
signiﬁcantly improves the models ﬁt. The left scatter plot shows the
relationship between monitored Ta and satellite Ts before the daily
calibration (R2 = 0.88) in 2003. The right scatter plot shows the
relationship between monitored Ta and the predictions from our
calibration stage in 2003 (cross validated R2 = 0.95). The ﬁrst stage
calibration models for the Night Ts are presented in Table 1 (the Day Ts
results can be found in Appendix A). The model revealed very high
out-of-sample ﬁts with a mean out of sample R2 of 0.947 (P b 0.001,
yearly range 0.933--0.958), and as expected a highly signiﬁcant
association between Ta and the main explanatory variableTs (Table 1).
The spatial and temporal CV results also presented very good ﬁts (Table
1). For the spatial variation in temperature the mean out-of-sample R2
across years was 0.832 and for the temporal variability the mean
out-of-sample R2 was 0.956 (P b 0.001). We found no bias in our cross
validation results (overall mean slope of observed vs. predicted =
1.00). The model also yielded very small prediction errors compared to
similar studies (Prihodko & Goward, 1997; Vancutsem et al., 2010; Zhu et
al., 2013): our model resulted in a RMSPE of 2.157 °C and spatial RMSPE
of 1.215 °C indicating strong model performance. The second model (model
2) also performed extremely well (Table 2) with a mean R2 across years
of 0.940 (P b 0.001, yearly range 0.902--0.962) which is very high
considering that these were days with neither ground Ta data nor
satellite Ts data in the grid cells. The sensitivity analysis results
also show very good overall model performance across all analyses and
are presented in Table 3. Results from validating the model per state
all showed excellent model performance ranging from R2 = 0.892--0.966
and RMSPE of 1.426 to 2.908. Validating our model in the greater Boston
area and the NYC area resulted in a R2 of 0.960, and 0.913 respectively
and RMSPE of 1.700--2.664. We also examined the performance in rural vs.
urban areas. The model preformed slightly better in urban areas as

136

I. Kloog et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 150 (2014) 132--139

Fig. 2. A scatter plot of the air temperature--surface temperature
relationship before (a) and after (b) the daily 2003 calibrations.

Table 1 Prediction accuracy: Ten-fold cross validated (CV) results for
model 1 predictions (calibration stage using MODIS night surface
temperature for 2000--2011). Yearly dataset

CV R2

Intercept a

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Mean
2000--2011

0.933 0.943 0.953 0.958 0.951 0.946 0.945 0.945 0.947 0.943 0.949 0.955
0.947

−0.019 0.000 0.021 0.022 0.001 0.021 0.025 0.020 −0.006 0.005 0.013
−0.005 0.008

a b

± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±

Slope a 0.022 0.015 0.018 0.017 0.014 0.016 0.013 0.013 0.011 0.009
0.009 0.009 0.014

1.001 1.000 0.999 0.999 1.000 0.999 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
1.000

± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±

0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001
0.001

CV R2 (Spatial component)

CV R2 (Temporal component)

RMSPEb

RMSPEb (Spatial)

0.814 0.806 0.823 0.884 0.829 0.800 0.757 0.923 0.828 0.850 0.870 0.806
0.832

0.945 0.958 0.964 0.964 0.960 0.954 0.955 0.952 0.954 0.953 0.957 0.958
0.956

2.109 2.102 2.124 2.082 2.113 2.219 2.103 2.360 2.141 2.224 2.224 2.083
2.157

1.246 1.183 1.195 1.107 1.161 1.225 1.167 1.290 1.238 1.209 1.253 1.303
1.215

Presented as parameter estimate ± standard error from linear regression
of held-out observations versus predictions. Root of the mean squared
prediction errors.

expected (R2 = 0.951, RMSPE = 2.010) as opposed to the rural areas (R2 =
0.949, RMSPE = 2.010). Finally, looking at differences by season, we saw
that the model predicts slightly better during the winter season than
the summer across all years (R2 = 0.944, RMSPE = 1.937 and R2 = 0.879,
RMSPE = 1.937 respectively). Fig. 3 shows the spatial pattern of
predicted Ta values from the Ts models, averaged over 2011 for the
metropolitan New-York area. Mean predicted minimum Ta values for 2011
ranged from 10.87 to 13.35 °C. The ﬁgure shows how urban areas appear
warmer than the

Table 2 Prediction accuracy: R2 for model 2 temperature predictions
(Final prediction model including locations without air/ surface
temperature for 2000--2011). Yearly dataset

R2

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Mean
2000--2011

0.957 0.945 0.950 0.962 0.926 0.926 0.935 0.949 0.948 0.947 0.936 0.902
0.940

surrounding areas. Also since we are predicting temperature at a high
spatial resolution one can see the differences in yearly temperature
between dense urban areas such as downtown NYC and nearby areas such as
central park.

Table 3 Prediction accuracy: Ten-fold cross validated (CV) results for
model 1 predictions for all states, sample cities, urban vs. rural and
season analysis for a sample year (2005). Type

CV R2

Slope

RMSPEa

WV VA PA MD NY RI NJ DE CT MA VT NH ME Boston NYC Rural Urban Winter
Summer

0.945 0.957 0.952 0.959 0.945 0.966 0.955 0.957 0.892 0.943 0.960 0.944
0.940 0.960 0.913 0.949 0.951 0.944 0.879

0.960 0.988 0.987 1.003 1.002 0.999 1.013 0.994 0.988 0.998 0.985 1.001
0.987 1.004 1.002 1.001 1.002 1.001 1.001

1.738 1.745 1.798 1.769 2.159 1.605 1.914 1.426 2.908 1.687 1.821 2.238
1.791 1.700 2.664 2.010 2.010 1.937 2.068

a

Root of the mean squared prediction errors.

I. Kloog et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 150 (2014) 132--139

137

Fig. 3. The spatial pattern of predicted Ta values from the Ts models,
averaged over the 2011 for the metropolitan New York area.

4. Discussion In this paper we show that by using MODIS Ts data, one can
   reliably assess Ta across large regions. We demonstrate this across
   Northeastern USA during the years 2000--2011. This study improves on
   previous studies (Fu et al., 2011; Kloog et al., 2012; Vancutsem et
   al., 2010; Zhu et al.,

2013) in a few key areas: First, daily calibrations of Ts--Ta results in
      a much better ﬁt, since the association varies daily and hence
      results in better predictions. This daily calibration approach
      highlights the differences in short-term temperature values
      between grid cells. Second, our model allows us to predict daily
      Ta at a very high resolution, in large areas with varying
      geographical characteristics. Finally, as opposed to all previous
      studies, we calibrate the 24 h Ta with both night Ts and day Ts
      and present how both perform well with the daily calibration. We
      choose to use night Ts for our ﬁnal calibration since the product
      is overall more stable (Vancutsem et al., 2010). Our results
      clearly present the strong association between Ts and Ta,
      describes very well both the intra and inter urban temporal and
      spatial patterns of Ta, and shows that Ts can be reliably used to
      predict Ta if modeled appropriately. Comparison of our model to
      previous studies using the MODIS satellite to estimate Ta is not
      straightforward due to the wide span of spatial and temporal
      scales and the fact that, to the best of our knowledge, our model
      is the only model to predict daily temperature values even when Ts
      data is unavailable. Nonetheless, our model performance is
      excellent and in good agreement with all previous studies (Benali,
      Carvalho, Nunes, Carvalhais, & Santos, 2012; Fu et al., 2011;
      Kloog et al., 2012; Vancutsem et al., 2010; Zhu et al., 2013). For
      example, the prediction accuracy of our models (R2 of 0.95--0.96,
      RMSPE = 2.157 °C) is signiﬁcantly better than Zhu et al. (2013) (R
      = 0.86, RMSE = 3.43 °C) even when we predict for days with no
      available Ts data (R2 of 0.94) and in good agreement with the
      Kloog study (Kloog et al., 2012) (R2 = 0.94). These newly
      generated predictions from our model could be used in a variety of
      studies since they provide spatially--temporally resolved

estimations of Ta, which are of great importance in areas with low
station density or with highly variable spatial patterns between
stations, e.g. mountainous regions, areas with large water bodies (such
as lakes and rivers) and rural areas. Such applications could include
hydrology, urban planning, agriculture, metrology, health related
studies, among others. For example in epidemiology studies, such data
could be used to assess the short and long term effect of exposure to
temperature extremes. Such studies tend to use one central
meteorological station to assign temperature exposure (Halonen et al.,
2010). This introduces exposure error, and likely biases the effect
estimates downward (Zeger et al., 2000). Our models will be critical for
improving the accuracy of these health effect estimates in future
epidemiological studies. Our predicted mean values are in a good
agreement with the recorded annual mean minimum temperatures from Ta
stations. For example, in NYC the annual mean difference between
measured (NCDC, 2010) and predicted Ta was 0.35 °C (11.00°--11.35 °C
respectively). In the Rural area of Harrisonburg, VA there was a
slightly larger difference of 1.01 °C (11.98°--10.97 °C respectively).
There are three types of exposure measurement error in classic
longitudinal studies of exposure and health (Zeger et al., 2000). The
ﬁrst error is derived from the difference between the daily personal
exposures of each individual and the daily community average personal
exposure. The second error stems from the difference between the daily
community average personal exposure and the true ambient value. Finally,
the third component of error is due the difference between the measured
and the true ambient value (measurement error). We anticipate that by
using our method which uses satellite MODIS Ts data to estimate
individual level exposures, much of the second exposure error type will
be minimized. While the approach presented in this paper uses a hybrid
model methodology incorporating remote sensing, advanced regressions and
interpolations (and focuses on generating predictions for epidemiology)
there are other advanced methodologies common in the climatology

138

I. Kloog et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 150 (2014) 132--139

ﬁeld that are worth mentioning such as dynamical downscaling and
sophisticate data assimilation (DA) techniques (Cocke & LaRow, 2000;
Reichle, 2008; Wilby & Wigley, 1997). Dynamical downscaling takes output
from a global or regional climate models (GCM/RCM) and converts the data
into a regional, numerical models with much higher spatial resolution.
There are multiple methods presented in recent years to reproduce
surface temperature and precipitation ﬁelds including include dynamical
modeling by nesting a regional climate model within a general
circulation model (Cocke & LaRow, 2000) and climate-analog procedures
(Houghton, 1996). DA methods combine data from measurements and models
of earth into an optimal estimate of the geophysical ﬁelds of interest.
DA systems interpolate and extrapolate the remote sensing observations
and provide complete estimates at the scales required by the
application, both in time and in the spatial dimensions (Reichle, 2008).
Among the recent applications of DA are geophysical processes, detection
of changes and trends in the earth system and forecasting. DA uses
sophisticated algorithms that can vary greatly since conditions in
different regions and between ocean and land vary considerably. Our
presented models while not as advanced are much simpler to construct and
run (to generate daily predictions) and thus more suitable for
epidemiology studies. There are some limitations in the present study.
For one, since we use a daily calibration method, it requires
continuous, relatively high spatial resolution daily Ta stations which
are not always available in other regions or areas of the world. Also,
the spatial distribution of Ta stations may change dramatically from
year to year in some areas. In the presented study, there were as few as
513 operating Ta stations in 2000 and as many as 2860 during 2011.
Though this does effect the overall performance of the model (R2 = 0.933
and RMSPE of 2.109 for 2000 vs R2 = 0.955 and RMSPE of 2.083 for 2011),
it suggests that the model can predict reliably even with lower spatial
distribution of stations. A ﬁnal limitation is that Ts data from MODIS
only starts on March 2000, limiting how far back one can predict Ta. In
conclusion, we demonstrate how Ts can be used reliably to predict daily
Ta at high resolution in large geographical areas even in days with
missing satellite data. Our results could be used in a variety of
studies since they provide spatially--temporally resolved estimations of
Ta.

Acknowledgments This study was funded by the Harvard EPA PM Clean Air
Research Center (CLARC) (R-834798), NIEHS ES000002, and the following
R21 climate grants ES020695 and AG040027. The authors also thank the
www.weatherunderground.com service and in particular Brendan Hayes and
John Celenza for their help.

References Basu, R., Feng, W. Y., & Ostro, B.D. (2008). Characterizing
temperature and mortality in nine California counties. Epidemiology, 19,
138. Benali, A., Carvalho, A.C., Nunes, J. P., Carvalhais, N., & Santos,
A. (2012). Estimating air surface temperature in Portugal using MODIS
LST data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 124, 108--121,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2012.04.024. Cocke, S., & LaRow, T. E.
(2000). Seasonal predictions using a regional spectral model embedded
within a coupled ocean--atmosphere model. Monthly Weather Review, 128.
Dousset, B. (1989). AVHRR-derived cloudiness and surface temperature
patterns over the Los Angeles area and their relationship to land use,
2132--2137. Florio, E. N., Lele, S. R., Chang, Y. C., Sterner, R., &
Glass, G. E. (2004). Integrating AVHRR satellite data and NOAA ground
observations to predict surface air temperature: A statistical approach.
International Journal of Remote Sensing, 25, 2979--2994. Fu, G., Shen,
Z., Zhang, X., Shi, P., Zhang, Y., & Wu, J. (2011). Estimating air
temperature of an alpine meadow on the Northern Tibetan Plateau using
MODIS land surface temperature. Acta Ecologica Sinica, 31, 8--13.
Garske, T., Ferguson, N. M., & Ghani, A.C. (2013). Estimating air
temperature and its inﬂuence on malaria transmission across Africa. PLoS
ONE, 8, e56487, http://dx.doi.org/10. 1371/journal.pone.0056487. Goetz,
S. J., Prince, S. D., & Small, J. (2000). Advances in satellite remote
sensing of environmental variables for epidemiological applications.
Advances in Parasitology (S.E.R. S.I. Hayed.), Vol. 47. (pp. 289--307).
: Academic Press. Halonen, J. I., Zanobetti, A., Sparrow, D., Vokonas,
P.S., & Schwartz, J. (2010). Associations between outdoor temperature
and markers of inﬂammation: a cohort study. Environmental Health, 9, 42.
Homer, C., Huang, C., Yang, L., Wylie, B., & Coan, M. (2004).
Development of a 2001 national landcover database for the United States.
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 70, 829--840. Houghton,
J. T. (1996). Climate change 1995: The science of climate change:
Contribution of working group I to the second assessment report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. : Cambridge University Press.
Jensen, J. R. (2009). Remote sensing of the environment. Pearson
Education India. Kloog, I., Chudnovsky, A., Koutrakis, P., & Schwartz,
J. (2012). Temporal and spatial assessments of minimum air temperature
using satellite surface temperature measurements in Massachusetts, USA.
Science of the Total Environment, 432, 85--92,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.05.095. Lennon, J. J., &
Turner, J. R. G. (1995). Predicting the spatial distribution of climate:
Temperature in Great-Britain. Journal of Animal Ecology, 64, 370--392.
Maune, D. (2007). Digital elevation model technologies and applications:
The DEM users manual. American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing, p. 620, ISBN 157083-082-7 (Maune, DF). Medina-Ramón, M.,
Zanobetti, A., Cavanagh, D. P., & Schwartz, J. (2006). Extreme
temperatures and mortality: Assessing effect modiﬁcation by personal
characteristics and speciﬁc cause of death in a multi-city case-only
analysis. Environmental Health Perspectives, 114, 1331--1336,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.9074. NCDC (2010). The National Climatic
Data Center data inventories. Ostro, B.D., Roth, L. A., Green, R. S., &
Basu, R. (2009). Estimating the mortality effect of the July 2006
California heat wave. Environmental Research, 109, 614--619,
http://dx.doi. org/10.1016/j.envres.2009.03.010. Prihodko, L., & Goward,
S. N. Z. (1997). Estimation of air temperature from remotely sensed
surface observations. Remote Sensing of Environment, 60, 335--346.
Reichle, R. H. (2008). Data assimilation methods in the Earth sciences.
Advances in Water Resources, 31, 1411--1418,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2008.01.001. Ren, C., O'Neill, M.
S., Park, S. K., Sparrow, D., Vokonas, P., & Schwartz, J. (2011).
Ambient temperature, air pollution, and heart rate variability in an
aging population. American Journal of Epidemiology, 173, 1013--1021,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwq477. Smith, W. L., Leslie, L. M., Diak,
G. R., Goodman, B.M., Velden, C. S., Callan, G. M., et al. (1988). The
integration of meteorological satellite imagery and numerical dynamical
forecast

Appendix

Table A1 Prediction accuracy: Ten-fold cross validated R2 for air
temperature stage 1 predictions (calibration stage using MODIS day
surface temperature for 2000--2011). Yearly dataset

CV R2

Intercepta

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Mean
2000--2008

0.937 0.947 0.955 0.961 0.953 0.951 0.949 0.946 0.953 0.952 0.952 0.960
0.951

0.002 0.017 0.014 0.02 0.027 0.027 −0.004 −0.025 0.003 0.003 −0.001
−0.006 0.006

a b

± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±

Slopea 0.02 0.017 0.017 0.016 0.014 0.013 0.012 0.012 0.011 0.009 0.009
0.006 0.013

1.001 1.001 0.999 0.999 0.999 0.999 1.00 1.001 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
1.000

± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±

0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.000
0.001

CV R2 Spatial

CV R2 Temporal

RMSPEb

RMSPEb Spatial

0.828 0.765 0.839 0.893 0.864 0.843 0.807 0.952 0.831 0.799 0.847 0.873
0.845

0.951 0.957 0.965 0.967 0.961 0.960 0.958 0.954 0.957 0.958 0.959 0.967
0.959

2.133 2.086 2.121 2.088 2.157 2.305 2.051 2.339 2.056 2.188 2.131 2.023
2.140

1.224 1.294 1.175 1.155 1.223 1.169 1.143 1.230 1.272 1.298 1.240 1.084
1.209

Presented as parameter estimate ± SE from linear regression of held-out
observations versus predictions. Root of the mean squared prediction
errors.

I. Kloog et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 150 (2014) 132--139
models. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A ---
Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences, 324, 317--323,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsta.1988.0022. Vancutsem, C., Ceccato, P.,
Dinku, T., & Connor, S. J. (2010). Evaluation of MODIS land surface
temperature data to estimate air temperature in different ecosystems
over Africa. Remote Sensing of Environment, 114, 449--465,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2009.10.002. Vicente-Serrano, S.,
Saz-Sánchez, M., & Cuadrat, J. (2003). Comparative analysis of
interpolation methods in the middle Ebro Valley (Spain): Application to
annual precipitation and temperature. Climate Research, 24, 161--180,
http://dx.doi.org/10.3354/cr024161. Von Klot, S., Melly, S., Coull, B.,
Dutton, J., & Schwartz, J. (2008). Daily temperature at residence vs
central measurements in eastern Massachusetts. Epidemiology, 19, S210.
Wan, Z. (2008). New reﬁnements and validation of the MODIS land-surface
temperature/ emissivity products. Remote Sensing of Environment, 112,
59--74. Wan, Z., & Dozier, J. (1996). A generalized split-window
algorithm for retrieving landsurface temperature from space. IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 34, 892--905. Wang, L.,
Koike, T., Yang, K., & Yeh, P. J. -F. (2009). Assessment of a
distributed biosphere hydrological model against streamﬂow and MODIS
land surface temperature in the upper Tone River Basin. Journal of
Hydrology, 377, 21--34, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jhydrol.2009.08.005. Watson, R. T., & Albritton, D. L. (2001). Climate
change 2001: Synthesis report: Third assessment report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. : Cambridge University Press.

139

Weng, Q., Lu, D., & Schubring, J. (2004). Estimation of land surface
temperature--vegetation abundance relationship for urban heat island
studies. Remote Sensing of Environment, 89, 467--483. Wilby, R. L., &
Wigley, T. M. L. (1997). Downscaling general circulation model output: A
review of methods and limitations. Progress in Physical Geography, 21,
530--548. Yang, J. S., Wang, Y. Q., & August, P. V. (2004). Estimation
of land surface temperature using spatial interpolation and
satellite-derived surface emissivity. Journal of Environmental
Information, 4, 40--47. Zanobetti, A., & Schwartz, J. (2008).
Temperature and mortality in nine US cities. Epidemiology, 19, 563.
Zeger, S. L., Thomas, D., Dominici, F., Samet, J. M., Schwartz, J.,
Dockery, D., et al. (2000). Exposure measurement error in time-series
studies of air pollution: Concepts and consequences. Env. Health
Perspectives, 108, 419--426. Zhang, L., Huang, J., Guo, R., Li, X., Sun,
W., & Wang, X. (2013). Spatio-temporal reconstruction of air temperature
maps and their application to estimate rice growing season heat
accumulation using multi-temporal MODIS data. Journal of Zhejiang
University. Science. B, 14, 144--161,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1631/jzus.B1200169. Zhu, W., Lű, A., & Jia, S.
(2013). Estimation of daily maximum and minimum air temperature using
MODIS land surface temperature products. Remote Sensing of Environment,
130, 62--73, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2012.10.034.


