Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Environmental Research journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envres

Associations between prenatal trafﬁc-related air pollution exposure and
birth weight: Modiﬁcation by sex and maternal pre-pregnancy body mass
index Ashwini Lakshmanan a,1, Yueh-Hsiu Mathilda Chiu b,1, Brent A.
Coull c,d, Allan C. Just d, Sarah L. Maxwell e, Joel Schwartz d,
Alexandros Gryparis f, Itai Kloog g, Rosalind J. Wright b,i, Robert O.
Wright h,i,n a

Division of Neonatal Medicine, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA Department of Pediatrics, Kravis Children's Hospital,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box
1198, New York, NY 10029, USA c Department of Biostatistics, Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA d Department of Environmental
Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA e Channing
Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital &
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA f Department of Hygiene,
Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, Medical School of Athens, Athens,
Greece g Department of Geography and Environmental Development,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel h Department of
Preventive Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA i The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA b

art ic l e i nf o

a b s t r a c t

Article history: Received 22 August 2014 Received in revised form 29
October 2014 Accepted 31 October 2014

Background: Prenatal trafﬁc-related air pollution exposure is linked to
adverse birth outcomes. However, modifying effects of maternal body mass
index (BMI) and infant sex remain virtually unexplored. Objectives: We
examined whether associations between prenatal air pollution and birth
weight differed by sex and maternal BMI in 670 urban ethnically mixed
mother--child pairs. Methods: Black carbon (BC) levels were estimated
using a validated spatio-temporal land-use regression (LUR) model; ﬁne
particulate matter (PM2.5) was estimated using a hybrid LUR model
incorporating satellite-derived Aerosol Optical Depth measures. Using
stratiﬁed multivariable-adjusted regression analyses, we examined
whether associations between prenatal air pollution and calculated birth
weight for gestational age (BWGA) z-scores varied by sex and maternal
pre-pregnancy BMI. Results: Median birth weight was 3.37 0.6 kg; 33% of
mothers were obese (BMI Z 30 kg/m3). In stratiﬁed analyses, the
association between higher PM2.5 and lower birth weight was signiﬁcant
in males of obese mothers (  0.42 unit of BWGA z-score change per IQR
increase in PM2.5, 95%CI:  0.79 to  0.06) ( PM2.5  sex  obesity
Pinteraction ¼ 0.02). Results were similar for BC models (Pinteraction ¼
0.002). Conclusions: Associations of prenatal exposure to trafﬁc-related
air pollution and reduced birth weight were most evident in males born
to obese mothers. & 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Trafﬁc-related air pollution Prenatal exposure Birth weight
Sex Body mass index

1. Introduction

Abbreviations: ACCESS, Asthma Coalition on Community, Environment, and
Social Stress Project; BC, black carbon; BMI, body mass index; BWGA,
birth weight for gestational age; PM2.5, particulate matter with a
diameter of r2.5 μm; PM10, particulate matter with a diameter of r 10
μm; SO2, sulfur dioxide; NO2, nitrogen dioxide; CO, carbon monoxide;
PAH, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon; SES, socioeconomic status n
Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: mathilda.chiu@mssm.edu (Y.-H.M.
Chiu), robert.wright@mssm.edu (R.O. Wright). 1 These authors contributed
equally to the manuscript.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2014.10.035 0013-9351/& 2014 Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

Low birth weight remains a major public health problem. It is associated
with increased infant mortality and developmental, behavioral, and
metabolic disorders that may persist into adult life (Barker, 2003;
Fisher et al., 2006; Johnson and Schoeni, 2011; McIntire et al., 1999).
Thus, an active area of research examines modiﬁable environmental risk
factors that impact birth outcomes (Nieuwenhuijsen et al., 2013).
Increasing evidence suggests that outdoor ambient air pollution affects
birth outcomes, including reduced birth weight (Dadvand et al., 2013;
Nieuwenhuijsen et al., 2013; Shah and Balkhair, 2011; Stieb et al.,
2012). Trafﬁc-related air

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

pollution, which remains a global public health problem especially in
the urban environment, has been particularly implicated (Cohen et al.,
2005; O'Neill et al., 2003; Proietti et al., 2013). Studies have linked
ambient and trafﬁc-related air pollution to increased pro-inﬂammatory
responses (Kannan et al., 2006; Ritz and Wilhelm, 2008) and systemic
oxidative stress (Donaldson et al., 2001). While mechanisms linking
ambient pollution to birth weight are not completely elucidated,
overlapping evidence suggests that air pollution exposure may impact
placental growth and function which in turn inﬂuences fetal growth. For
example, animal studies have linked air pollution exposure with
disrupted placental functional morphology in mice (e.g., reduced volume,
caliber and surface area of maternal blood spaces, greater fetal
capillary surfaces and diffusive conductance) (Veras et al., 2008).
Moreover, various factors including vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and placental growth factor (PlGF), which play a role in
placental vascular development as well as enzymes such as soluble
fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) which may inhibit activity of these
growth factors (Herraiz et al., 2014; Hoeben et al., 2004), may be
inﬂuenced by air pollution exposures. For example, a recent human study
links maternal exposure to particulate matter with a diameter r10 μm
(PM10) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) with higher fetal sFlt-1 and lower
PlGF levels (van den Hooven et al., 2012). It has been proposed that
prenatal air pollution exposure likely involves enhanced maternal
oxidative stress and inﬂammation causing decreased placental blood ﬂow,
disrupted trans-placental oxygenation and placental inﬂammation leading
to impaired nutrient accretion for the fetus and in turn, decreased
fetal growth (Donaldson et al., 2001; Kannan et al., 2006; Proietti et
al., 2013; Yorifuji et al., 2012). Recently, prenatal PM10 exposure was
found to be associated with mitochondrial alterations which can also
intensify oxidative stress (Janssen et al., 2012). Other mechanisms of
action have been proposed including endocrine disruption of hormones
that regulate placental function and growth (Linton et al., 1993; Slama
et al., 2008). Multiple studies have examined associations between air
pollution and adverse birth outcomes using different study designs, data
collection methods and analytical approaches, each with their own
strengths and limitations. Studies with larger sample sizes consider
more chronic exposure to ambient air pollution and are usually based on
birth certiﬁcates/registries without extensive information on individual
factors, and have relied upon exposure assessments based on relatively
crude estimates of ambient pollutants (e.g., proximity to roadways,
exposure level measured by the closest monitoring site) and lack
individual level information on personal and lifestyle characteristics
or health behaviors which may confound the associations being examined
(Ritz and Wilhelm, 2008). Exposure misclassiﬁcation that results from
the use of cruder proxies such as proximity to roadway, while likely
nondifferential, requires considerably large sample sizes to overcome.
While studies using personal sampling may address some of these issues
and hence yield better statistical power to detect associations (Dailey,
2009; Ponce et al., 2005), this approach is labor intensive and
prohibitively costly for larger-scaled studies, typically includes
exposure measurements at limited time points during pregnancy, and
provides limited data on the geospatial distribution of pollution. Other
researchers have used advanced spatiotemporal air pollution land-use
regression (LUR) techniques to obtain estimates on exposure proﬁles
throughout the pregnancy (Ghosh et al., 2012; Pedersen et al., 2013;
Wilhelm et al., 2012). Recently, studies using prenatal particulate
matter with a diameter of r2.5 μm (PM2.5) exposures estimated by a
state-of-the-art modeling method that incorporates satellite-based data
within a LUR framework also demonstrated signiﬁcant associations with
low birth weight and preterm birth (Hyder et al., 2014; Kloog et al.,
2012). This approach yields daily estimates that can be aggregated

269

to assess more chronic exposures to air pollution over the course of
pregnancy. In addition, few studies have focused on ethnic minorities
and lower socioeconomic status (SES) urban populations, who are more
likely to experience adverse birth outcomes (Dailey, 2009; Ponce et al.,
2005; Wallace, 2011; Woodruff et al., 2003; Zeka et al., 2008) and may
also be more likely to live in disadvantaged communities with increased
exposure to trafﬁc-related air pollution (O'Neill et al., 2003). In
addition, evidence suggests that SES, including individual and
neighborhood SES, and race might be associated with maternal obesity
(Genereux et al., 2008). Studies to date have also not fully considered
factors that may modify pollution effects on birth weight such as
maternal pre-pregnancy obesity and infant sex (Bonzini et al., 2010;
Ritz and Wilhelm, 2008). Previous studies in non-pregnant adults suggest
that obesity may modify the association between air pollution and
adverse health outcomes (Baja et al., 2010; Dubowsky et al., 2006).
Enhanced oxidative stress and inﬂammation are again implicated. For
example, studies describe associations of higher ambient PM exposure
with increased white blood cell count and systematic inﬂammatory
markers, and demonstrate that obesity enhances these associations
(Dubowsky et al., 2006). Moreover, pregnancy is a state having enhanced
susceptibility to oxidative stress (Casanueva and Viteri, 2003; Patil et
al., 2007) which has implications for fetal growth (Weber et al., 2014).
These associations may be further modiﬁed by maternal obesity (Ferretti
et al., 2014; Rajasingam et al., 2009; Sen et al., 2014). Furthermore,
evidence suggests that maternal height and weight may affect birth
weight differentially in males and females (Lampl et al., 2010). Some
studies demonstrate that male infants were at a higher risk of low birth
weight in relationship to higher levels of air pollution compared with
females (Ghosh et al., 2007; Jedrychowski et al., 2009), while others
did not ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant differences across sex (Bell et
al., 2008; Pedersen et al., 2013). To our knowledge, only one study has
examined effect modiﬁcation by maternal obesity and found that maternal
prepregnancy obesity signiﬁcantly exacerbated the risk of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) exposure on low birth weight in
African-American newborns in a low income inner-city population (Choi
and Perera, 2012). None have examined interactive effects of maternal
obesity and sex concurrently. Given these inter-connecting relationships
we took advantage of an ethnically diverse urban sample of pregnant
women to assess whether air pollution was associated with birth weight
for gestational age and whether obesity and/or sex modiﬁed this
relationship, while we were able to take into account a number of the
potential confounders discussed above. Speciﬁcally, we examined the
associations between prenatal maternal exposure to trafﬁc-related
ambient air pollutants [black carbon (BC), a surrogate of trafﬁc
particles, and ambient PM2.5] and birth weight. The primary objective of
these analyses was to examine interactions among prenatal air pollution,
sex, and maternal obesity given overlapping evidence suggesting
differential associations between ambient air pollution and birth
outcomes related to maternal obesity and infant sex, as well as
associations between maternal height and weight and infant growth that
differ based on child sex.

2. Material and methods 2.1. Study participants Between August 2002 to
   September 2009, English- or Spanishspeaking women Z18 years old
   receiving prenatal care at the Brigham and Women's Hospital (BWH) and
   Boston Medical Center

270

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

(BMC) and afﬁliated community health centers were recruited into the
Asthma Coalition on Community, Environment, and Social Stress (ACCESS)
project, a pregnancy cohort examining the effects of perinatal stress
and other environmental factors on urban childhood asthma risk (Wright
et al., 2008). Among women approached in mid- to late-pregnancy (28.4
77.9 weeks gestation) who were eligible, 989 (78.1%) agreed to enroll.
Based on screening data, there were no signiﬁcant differences for
race/ethnicity, education, and income between participants who enrolled
and those who declined. Of those enrolled, 955 gave birth to a singleton
live born infant and continued follow-up. Procedures were approved by
human studies committees at the BWH and BMC and written consent was
obtained in participants' primary language (English, Spanish). 2.2.
Prenatal air pollution exposure Individuals' prenatal exposure to BC was
estimated based on residence during the entire pregnancy (i.e., at
enrollment and updated if they moved) using a validated spatio-temporal
LUR model as detailed elsewhere (Gryparis et al., 2007). In brief, the
BC model was built using data of 24-h estimates of BC exposure based on
46021 pollution measurements from 42079 unique exposure days at 82
monitoring locations in greater Boston (three-quarters residential,
one-quarter commercial or governmental sites). Predictions were based on
meteorological and other characteristics (e.g. weekday/weekend) of a
particular day, geographic information system (GIS)-based measures
(e.g., trafﬁc density within 100 m, population density, distance to
major roadway, percent urbanization), and BC levels measured from a
central monitor (representing overall area concentration on a particular
day). The cumulative trafﬁc density was recorded once per location,
indicating the sum of trafﬁc counts on all road segments within 100 m
multiplied by the length of each road segment. Spline regression methods
were used to allow factors to nonlinearly predict exposure and
thin-plate splines captured additional spatial variability, analogous to
kriging. Separate models were ﬁt for the cold (November--April) and warm
(May--October) seasons; the R2 of the model over both seasons was 0.82.
Prenatal PM2.5 exposure was estimated using a novel exposure model
assessing temporally- and spatially-resolved PM2.5 exposures, as
detailed previously (Kloog et al., 2011). This method utilizes Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite-derived Aerosol
Optical Depth (AOD) measurements in a hybrid model including traditional
LUR to predict daily PM2.5 concentration levels at a 10  10 km spatial
resolution, allowing us to derive residence-speciﬁc estimates of PM2.5
exposures for each participant. As the model is based on daily physical
measurements of a surrogate for PM2.5 concentrations in each grid cell,
it beneﬁts both from the spatial resolution of LUR models and the
spatiotemporal resolution of satellite models. The model was run using
day-speciﬁc calibrations of AOD data using ground PM2.5 measurements
from 78 monitoring stations and LUR and meteorological variables
(temperature, wind speed, visibility, elevation, distance to major
roads, percent of open space, point emissions and area emissions). To
estimate PM2.5 concentrations in each grid cell on each day, the
AOD-PM2.5 relationship was calibrated for each day using data from grid
cells with both monitor and AOD values using mixed models with random
slopes for day and nested regions. A second model was used to estimate
exposures on days when AOD measures were not available (due to cloud
coverage, snow, etc.). The ﬁnal model was ﬁt with a smooth function of
latitude and longitude and a random intercept for each cell that takes
advantage of associations between grid cell AOD values and PM2.5 data
from monitors located elsewhere, and associations with available AOD
values in neighboring grid cells. The “out of sample”

10-fold cross validation R2 for daily values were 0.83 and 0.81 for days
with and without available AOD data, respectively. We estimated
individual daily BC and daily PM2.5 exposure level for each participant
based on the participant's address during pregnancy using these models,
and then calculated the overall prenatal exposure level by averaging the
daily estimates throughout the entire pregnancy. The predicted prenatal
BC and PM2.5 levels at each participant's residence are shown elsewhere
(Chiu et al., 2014). 2.3. Birth weight outcome Birth weight was obtained
from labor and delivery record review, and gestational age was
calculated based on maternal report of last menstrual period and updated
based on obstetrical estimates on medical record review at delivery if
discrepant (Hoffman et al., 2008). Because birth weight is tightly tied
to length of gestation and each may have different predictors and there
are substantial data that show that birth weight rises in a non-linear
pattern as gestational age increases, traditional procedural methods to
use raw birth weight data and adjusting for gestational age in a linear
regression model might add bias in ways difﬁcult to predict (Oken et
al., 2003). The use of these z-scores allows adjustment for gestational
age more precisely as it will factor in nonlinear growth but can still
be easily applied to linear regression models hence reduce both bias and
residual confounding (Oken et al., 2003). Therefore, birth weight for
gestational age (BWGA) zscores were calculated based on sex-speciﬁc
normative U.S. data (Oken et al., 2003) and were used as our main
outcome of interest as in other recent studies (Hinkle et al., 2014;
Rytter et al., 2014; Sridhar et al., 2014). BWGA z-scores were normally
distributed in our sample. 2.4. Effect modiﬁers 2.4.1. Child sex Child
sex was based on maternal report on the postnatal questionnaire. 2.4.2.
Maternal pre-pregnancy anthropometrics Maternal pre-pregnancy height and
weight were ascertained by self-report at enrollment. Body mass index
(BMI) was calculated by dividing weight by height squared (kg/m2). As
previously reported (Wright et al., 2013), a validation analysis on a
subset of 121 ACCESS women using Bland--Altman plots showed no
difference in the level of agreement/disagreement across values of
height and weight when comparing height and weight measured early in
pregnancy ( o10 weeks) to self-reported values. We deﬁned pre-pregnancy
obesity as BMIZ30 kg/m2, overweight as 25.0--29.9 kg/m2, and normal
weight as 18.5--24.9 kg/m2 based on CDC guidelines (CDC, 2012). Two
participants with BMI between 18.0--18.5 kg/m2 were collapsed into the
normal weight group. 2.5. Covariates A number of standard control
variables and potential confounders previously identiﬁed as being
related to air pollution exposure and birth weight were considered.
Maternal age, race/ ethnicity, and maternal education status, an
indicator of individual-level SES, were ascertained by questionnaire.
Season of birth, which has been associated with birth weight (McGrath et
al., 2005; Murray et al., 2000; Tustin et al., 2004; Waldie et al.,
2000) and prenatal air pollution exposures (Zhang et al., 2006), was
also included. We also considered covariates that may co-vary with
increased ambient air pollution exposure in these lower-income urban
mothers that also may impact birth outcomes including

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

maternal smoking and prenatal psychological stress (Meng et al., 2013).
Mothers reported prenatal smoking at enrollment and in the third
trimester, and were classiﬁed as prenatal smokers if they reported
smoking at either visit. As maternal stress during pregnancy may co-vary
with air pollution exposures and be associated with child birth weight,
it was considered as a confounder. We indexed maternal stress using the
Crisis in Family Systems-Revised survey (CRYSIS-R), validated in English
and Spanish, which was administered prenatally within two weeks of
enrollment (Berry et al., 2001; Shalowitz et al., 1998). This survey
assesses life events experienced across 11 domains (e.g., ﬁnancial,
relationships, violence, housing issues, discrimination/prejudice).
Mothers endorsed events experienced in the past six months and rated
each as positive, negative, or neutral. We summed the number of domains
with one or more negative event was endorsed to create a continuous
negative life events (NLEs) domain score, with higher scores indicating
greater stress. While participants were asked about events across 11
domains, the maximum number endorsed by participants in this study was
9. In addition, community-level SES was measured by a neighborhood
disadvantage index derived by linking enrollment addresses with
aggregated data (census tract) from the 2000 U.S. Census (indexed as an
average z-score for percentages of: residents living below poverty,
unemployed, nonU.S. citizens, and nonwhite in the neighborhood) (Chiu et
al., 2012;

271

Sampson et al., 1999). Information on parity, a potential confounder of
the association between air pollution and birth weight (Madsen et al.,
2010; Pedersen et al., 2013), was obtained by maternal report at
enrollment. 2.6. Data analysis These analyses included 670 mothers and
their infants with data on prenatal BC and PM2.5 exposure as well as
maternal prepregnancy weight and height. Characteristics of included
(maternal age 27 76 years, 62% with rhigh school education, 29% Blacks,
55% Hispanics, 52% boys) vs. excluded subjects (maternal age 26 75
years, 64% with rhigh school education, 38% Blacks, 48% Hispanics, 53%
boys) were not signiﬁcantly different. Multivariable-adjusted linear
regression analyses were used to examine associations between the
prenatal air pollution exposure indicators and infant's BWGA z-scores.
BC and PM2.5 were examined in separate models as they were moderately
correlated (Spearman's r ¼0.55, po 0.001). Models were adjusted for
season of birth, maternal age, race, educational status, prenatal
smoking, prenatal stress (NLEs), and neighborhood disadvantage z-score.
Effect modiﬁcation by sex and maternal pre-pregnancy body size was
examined in stratiﬁed analysis and by ﬁtting interaction terms. We
examined 2-way interactions between 1) air pollution

Table 1 ACCESS participant characteristics by maternal BMI status and
child's sex. All subjects (n¼ 670)

Categorical variables Child's sex (n, %) Female Male Race (n, %)
Hispanic Black White/Other Season of birth (n, %)b Winter Spring Summer
Fall Maternal education (n, %) 412 yrs r12 yrs Maternal prenatal smoking
(n, %) No Yes Continuous variables Prenatal BC level (mg/m3; median,
IQR) Prenatal PM2.5 level (mg/m3; median, IQR) Birthweight (g; mean, SD)
Gestational age at birth (weeks; mean, SD) Birthweight for gestational
age zscore (mean, SD) Maternal pre-pregnancy BMI (kg/m2; mean, SD)
Maternal age at enrollment (years; mean, SD) Prenatal negative life
events (median, IQR)c Neighborhood disadvantage z-score (median, IQR) a
b c

Maternal pre-pregnancy BMI statusa

Child's sex

Normal weight (n¼ 202)

Over weight (n¼ 238)

Obese (n ¼230)

Boys (n¼ 345)

Girls (n¼ 325)

n

%

n

%

n

%

n

%

n

%

n

%

325 345

48.5 51.5

95 107

47 53

113 125

47.5 52.5

117 113

50.9 49.1

-- 345

-- 100.0

325 --

100.0 --

343 215 112

51.2 32.1 16.7

108 61 33

53.5 30.2 16.3

127 73 38

53.4 30.7 16

108 81 41

47 35.2 17.8

169 115 61

49.0 33.3 17.7

174 100 51

53.5 30.8 15.7

186 146 144 194

27.8 21.8 21.5 29

62 43 42 55

30.7 21.3 20.8 27.2

62 52 54 70

26.1 21.9 22.7 29.4

62 51 48 69

27 22.2 20.9 30

86 85 82 92

24.9 24.6 23.8 26.7

100 61 62 102

30.8 18.8 19.1 31.4

252 418

37.6 62.4

67 135

33.2 66.8

90 148

37.8 62.2

95 135

41.3 58.7

131 214

38.0 62.0

121 204

37.2 62.8

563 107

84 16

178 24

88.1 11.9

201 37

84.5 15.6

184 46

80 20

293 52

84.9 15.1

270 55

83.1 16.9

0.36

0.36

0.29--0.52

0.35

0.27--0.47

0.38

0.29--0.51

10.9

10.1--11.7

10.8

10.1--11.7

11.2

10.1--11.9

3277.1 39.2

0.26-- 0.47 10.0-- 11.7 585.9 2

0.38

3179.8 39

0.28-- 0.48 10.2-- 12.0 541.2 1.9

0.35

3288.3 39.1

0.28-- 0.49 10.1-- 11.8 637.9 2

3395.2 744.4 38.9 2.1

3332.4 624.7 39.0 2.1

3241.6 649.2 39.2 1.9

 0.15

1.08

 0.37

0.98

 0.19

1.09

0.09

1.12

 0.02

1.09

 0.28 1.06

28.8

6.3

22.7

1.8

27.3

1.4

35.8

5.3

28.7

6.3

29.0

6.4

27

6

25.4

5.6

27.7

6.1

27.5

6

27.0

6.0

26.9

5.9

2

1--4

2

1--3

2

1--4

2

1--4

2

1--4

2

1--4

0.25

 0.50-- 0.48

0.25

 0.49-- 0.52

0.25

 0.55-- 0.46

0.25

 0.35--0.49 0.17

11

11.2

10.9

Normal weight: 18--24.9 kg/m2; over weight: 25--29.9 kg/m2; obesity: Z30
kg/m2. Winter: December--February; spring: March--May; summer:
June--August; fall: September--November). Measured by the Crisis in
Family Systems-Revised (CRISYS-R) survey (Berry et al. 2001; Shalowitz
et al. 1998).

 0.64--0.46 0.25

 0.25--0.52

272

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

among

to obese mothers (Fig. 1; Pinteraction for both BC and PM2.5 models). Of
note, there was some suggestion of effect modiﬁcation by sex in the
non-obese mother group for BC model where the associations seemed to be
stronger in females in the stratiﬁed analysis, but the BC  sex
interaction term was not signiﬁcant (Pinteraction ¼0.17). These ﬁndings
were consistent with results from our secondary analyses using GAMs with
smooth terms for prenatal air pollution levels, stratiﬁed by sex and
maternal pre-pregnancy obesity (Fig. 2 for BC, and Fig. 3 for PM2.5).
The associations were more apparent in males born to obese mothers for
both BC and PM2.5, while for females the association was seen for those
born to non-obese mothers in the BC model but not in the PM2.5 model.
Sensitivity analyses considering only full-term infants, using raw birth
weight as the outcome with and without adjusting for gestational age,
and additionally adjusting for parity, as well as additionally including
maternal BMI in the models did not substantively change the results
(data not shown).

and sex, 2) air pollution and maternal pre-pregnancy obesity, as well as
3-way interactions among air pollution, sex, and maternal pre-pregnancy
obesity. To ﬂexibly explore the functional form of the exposure-response
relationship between air pollution and birth weight from the data rather
than placing parametric assumptions on the form of this relationship
(e.g., linear or not), we also performed analyses using Generalized
Additive Models (GAMs) with smooth penalized spline terms (Wood, 2006)
for the air pollution effects. In addition, we also performed
sensitivity analyses by restricting to full-term (Z 37 weeks of
gestation at birth) infants, by using the raw birth weight data (in
grams) with and without adjusting for gestational age in the model, by
additionally adjusting for parity (0, 1, 41), as well as additionally
including maternal BMI in the model without interaction terms and in the
air pollution × sex model. Most analyses were performed using SAS
(version 9.1.3, Cary, NC); GAMs were implemented in the mgcv package in
R (version 2.13.0, Vienna, Austria).

males

born

(air pollution  sex) ¼ 0.01

3. Results

4. Discussion

Mothers were primarily ethnic minority (51% Hispanic, 33% African
American), low SES (64% having r12 years of education), and nonsmokers
(79%). Male newborns had greater mean birth weight (3332.4 g vs. 3241.6
g, p ¼0.09) and greater mean BWGA zscores ( 0.02 vs.  0.28, p o0.01)
than female newborns. Table 1 summarizes participant characteristics and
prenatal air pollution by maternal pre-pregnancy BMI and by sex. Levels
of prenatal BC and PM2.5 exposure were similar among the BMI groups as
well as between the sex groups (Table 1). Tables 2 and 3 present the
relationship between prenatal air pollution exposures and BWGA z-scores
in the multivariable-adjusted regression models without and with
interaction terms. Overall, we did not ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant
association between individual air pollution levels averaged across the
entire pregnancy and BWGA z-scores in the main models without
interaction terms. For models with interaction terms, we observed a
signiﬁcant 3-way interaction among prenatal air pollution, sex and
pre-pregnancy obesity for both BC (Table 2; Pinteraction ¼0.002) and
PM2.5 (Table 3; Pinteraction ¼0.02) models. We caution that it is
difﬁcult to interpret a 2-way interaction when a 3-way interaction
exists, and thus for clearer interpretation we have performed analyses
stratiﬁed by sex and maternal obesity (Fig. 1). We observed
statistically signiﬁcant interactions between air pollution and sex only
in infants born to obese mothers; increased air pollution levels were
associated with decreased BWGA z-scores

These data add to a growing literature linking ambient pollution
exposure to low birth weight. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study
to concurrently examine relationships among air pollutants, obesity, sex
and fetal growth. Our ﬁnding of a three-way interaction among prenatal
trafﬁc-related air pollution exposure, sex, and maternal pre-pregnancy
obesity in relation to infant's birth weight highlights a more complex
relationship than that of competing risk factors. Speciﬁcally, male
infants born to obese mothers may be more susceptible to prenatal
trafﬁc-related air pollution. The observed association between prenatal
exposure to air pollution and decreased birth weight, particularly among
males, has been reported in a few prior epidemiologic studies.
Jedrychowski et al. reported signiﬁcant associations between PM2.5
measured from 481 Polish women using 2-day personal air samplings in the
second trimester and decreased birth weight in their male offspring
(Jedrychowski et al., 2009). Ghosh et al. performed a systematic review
of sex differences on prenatal air pollution and birth outcomes, and
re-analyzed data from several previous studies that had not speciﬁcally
assessed sex effects in this context (Ghosh et al., 2007). They
re-analyzed data from a study in China originally conducted by Wang et
al. (1997) and found higher odds ratios of prenatal exposure to sulfur
dioxide (SO2) and total suspended particles measured at local monitoring
sites as predictors of low birth weight (deﬁned as o 2500 g at delivery)
among boys

Table 2 Multivariable regression models examining prenatal BC in
relation to BWGA z-score.a BC  Male Model

Main Model

b

BC (per IQR increase) Male Maternal BMI Normal Overweight Obese BC 
Male BC  Obese Male  Obese BC  Male  Obese

BC  Obese Model

BC  Male  Obese Model

β

s.e.

P

β

s.e.

P

β

s.e.

P

β

s.e.

P

 0.07 0.24

0.07 0.09

0.31 0.01

 0.02 0.39

0.09 0.23

0.80 0.08

 0.10 0.25

0.08 0.09

0.18 0.004

 0.23  0.09

0.11 0.27

0.04 0.73

Ref 0.19 0.36

-- 0.11 0.24

-- 0.08 0.14

0.06

0.11

0.59

Ref 0.20  0.21 0.22 0.39 1.23  0.72

-- 0.11 0.35 0.14 0.16 0.47 0.23

-- 0.06 0.54 0.11 0.01 0.01 0.002

 0.08

0.11

0.47

a All models were also adjusted for season of birth, maternal race,
education, age at enrollment, prenatal smoking, prenatal NLEs, and
neighborhood disadvantage index. The β′s denote the effect estimates of
the main exposure of interest as well as effect estimates of the
interaction terms in each regression model. b Interquartile range (IQR)
of BC level¼ 0.21 mg/m3.

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

273

Table 3 Multivariable regression models examining prenatal PM2.5 in
relation to BWGA z-score.a PM2.5  Male Model

Main Model

PM2.5 (per IQR increase)b Male Maternal BMI Normal Overweight Obese
PM2.5  Male PM2.5  Obese Male  Obese PM2.5  Male  Obese

PM2.5  Obese Model

PM2.5  Male  Obese Model

β

s.e.

P

β

s.e.

P

β

s.e.

P

β

s.e.

P

 0.05 0.26

0.08 0.08

0.52 0.002

0.08 1.97

0.10 0.89

0.43 0.03

 0.03 0.28

0.09 0.08

0.77 0.001

 0.02 0.42

0.12 1.08

0.89 0.70

Ref 0.16 0.57

-- 0.10 0.93

-- 0.11 0.54

 0.02

0.14

0.91

Ref 0.17  1.32  0.01 0.28 4.27  0.67

-- 0.10 1.29 0.16 0.19 1.85 0.28

-- 0.10 0.30 0.94 0.14 0.02 0.02

 0.26

0.13

0.05

a All models were also adjusted for season of birth, maternal race,
education, age at enrollment, prenatal smoking, prenatal NLEs, and
neighborhood disadvantage index. The β′s denote the effect estimates of
the main exposure of interest as well as effect estimates of the
interaction terms in each regression model. b Interquartile range (IQR)
of PM2.5 level¼ 1.64 mg/m3.

(Ghosh et al., 2007). They also found that data from a study in Georgia,
originally conducted by Rogers et al. (2000), suggested that boys were
more likely to be very low birth weight ( o1500 g) than girls when their
mothers were exposed to increased air pollution quantiﬁed by a sum total
of suspended particulates and SO2 (Ghosh et al., 2007). Their
re-analyses of data from a casecontrol study in California (Wilhelm and
Ritz, 2003) also found signiﬁcant associations between nitrogen dioxide
(NO2) estimated by distance-weighted trafﬁc density measures and low
birth weight (o 2,500 g) only among boys; on the other hand,
sexstratiﬁed analyses of PM10, carbon monoxide (CO), and ozone did not
show signiﬁcant association in either sex (Ghosh et al., 2007). Another
study by Bell et al. (2008) also did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant sex differences.
In another recent European multi-center study, Pedersen et al. (2013)
reported that the association between prenatal PM2.5 and low birth
weight was stronger for boys than girls, but the differences were not
statistically signiﬁcant. Therefore, it is possible that other factors
that vary across studies, such as prepregnancy obesity or different air
pollution constituents may play an additional modifying role in
conjunction with sex. Air pollution exposure in pregnant women may
disrupt fetal antioxidant/oxidant balance potentially leading to
oxidative injury of the developing fetus (Proietti et al., 2013; Sram et
al., 2005).

Obesity may share common pathologic mechanisms with air pollution.
Studies demonstrated that obesity and metabolic syndrome are
characterized by chronic inﬂammation (Hotamisligil, 2006). Pregnancy is
a stage having increased susceptibility to oxidative stress (Casanueva
and Viteri, 2003; Patil et al., 2007) and effects may be enhanced in
obese mothers (Ferretti et al., 2014; Rajasingam et al., 2009; Sen et
al., 2014). Furthermore, studies have demonstrated that obese pregnant
women may have enhanced systemic and placental inﬂammation (Stewart et
al., 2007) and increased pro-inﬂammatory cytokine expression in the
placenta (Challier et al., 2008), suggesting that maternal obesity and
trafﬁc air pollution exposure may act synergistically to impact fetal
development. The biological mechanisms of sex-speciﬁc effects of air
pollution are less well understood but may also be linked to oxidative
stress. A recent natural twin study reported sex differences in
vulnerability to oxidative stress between co-twins of unlike-sex pairs
-- male infants had higher levels of oxidative stress as indexed by
15-F2t-isoprostane, a byproduct of free radical-catalyzed peroxidation
of essential fatty acids, compared to their female counterparts
(Minghetti et al., 2013). This suggests that the male fetus may be more
susceptible to maternal oxidative stress than the female fetus when
experiencing the same environmental challenge. Thus the combination of
obesity, sex and air pollution in

Fig. 1. Associations between prenatal maternal air pollution exposure
and birth weight for gestation age z-score, stratiﬁed by sex and
maternal pre-pregnancy. obesity. This ﬁgure demonstrates effect
estimates and 95% CIs for BWGA z-score change per IQR increase in (A) BC
level (IQR ¼ 0.21 mg/m3) and (B) PM2.5 level (IQR ¼ 1.64 mg/m3),
stratiﬁed by sex and maternal pre-pregnancy obesity. Pinteraction
denotes p-Value for air pollution  sex interaction term in maternal
obesity-stratiﬁed models. Models were adjusted for season of birth,
maternal race, education, age at enrollment, prenatal smoking, prenatal
NLEs, and neighborhood disadvantage index.

274

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

Fig. 2. Exposure--response relationships between prenatal BC level and
BWGA z-score. Penalized spline curves demonstrating the relationship of
prenatal maternal exposure to BC (µg/m3) with BWGA z-score, stratiﬁed by
sex and maternal pre-pregnancy obesity. Solid line depicts the penalized
spline curve while dotted lines indicate the 95% conﬁdence bounds.
Models were each adjusted for season of birth, maternal race, education,
age at enrollment, prenatal smoking, prenatal NLEs, and neighborhood
disadvantage index.

fetal life may act synergistically to create an inﬂammatory milieu that
impairs growth. It is less clear why there is a suggestion that girls
might be more vulnerable to an association between increased BC and
reduced birth weight in the non-obese group (although the BC  sex
interaction was not statistically signiﬁcant [Fig. 1]). Strengths of
this study include the reasonably large lower SES and ethnically mixed
inner-city cohort, and available data on many important confounders. We
were able to control for maternal psychosocial stress, a factor that may
co-vary with increased exposure to environmental toxicants including
ambient pollution, particularly among lower-SES urban populations (Makri
and Stilianakis, 2008). Most previous studies of prenatal air pollution
and birth weight have used raw birth weight as an outcome measure,

which might be affected by the infant's gestational age at birth. Our
study used BWGA z-score, which is standardized based on U.S. norms and
is proposed to be a more sophisticated measure of birth weight (Oken et
al., 2003). In addition, our ﬁndings were robust when using either BWGA
z-score or raw birth weight. Moreover, the individual prenatal PM2.5
exposure estimates in this study were derived using a state-of-the-art
method which models daily exposure estimates incorporating satellite
data. Notably, Hyder et al. recently compared the effect estimates of
birth outcomes from prenatal PM2.5 estimated using different exposure
assessment approaches (including monitoring data and modeling methods
based on satellite data) in 834,322 births in Connecticut and
Massachusetts during 2000-2006, and found that analyses based on
satellite data provided additional useful information in

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

275

Fig. 3. Exposure--response relationships between prenatal PM2.5 level
and BWGA z-score. Penalized spline curves demonstrating the relationship
of prenatal maternal exposure to PM2.5 (µg/m3) with BWGA z-score,
stratiﬁed by sex and maternal pre-pregnancy obesity. Solid line depicts
the penalized spline curve while dotted lines indicate the 95% conﬁdence
bounds. Models were each adjusted for season of birth, maternal race,
education, age at enrollment, prenatal smoking, prenatal NLEs, and
neighborhood disadvantage index.

this context (Hyder et al., 2014). Finally, results from our analyses
were similar when using two different widely-used indicators of
trafﬁc-related and ambient air pollution, as well as different
statistical approaches. We also acknowledge some limitations. We used
BMI as our measurement of maternal pre-pregnancy body size and did not
have data on body shape or fat mass, which may differentially affect
efﬁciency of the placenta and birth weight (Brown et al., 1996; Winder
et al., 2011). We did not have data on gestational weight gain, which
may act jointly with pre-pregnancy weight on birth weight effects
(Al-Hinai et al., 2013). Information on pregnancy complications, which
may be mediating or modifying the complex interactions examined in our
study (Lee et al., 2013; Malmqvist et al., 2013; Rich et al., 2009), was
not available. In addition, overlapping research suggests interactions
among diet, genetic variants, and biochemical markers. For example,
genetic

background may interact with habitual total dietary fat and fatty acid
composition, which have been linked to pulmonary and placental
inﬂammation, affecting predisposition to a woman's responsiveness to PM
exposures given that both may contribute to transplacental oxygen and
nutrient transport (Kannan et al., 2006; Ordovas and Corella, 2004).
Other environmental factors such as temperature and noise that may
co-vary with air pollution might also affect birth outcomes. Further
studies with larger sample sizes may therefore consider joint or
interactive associations among these additional factors as well as
potential mediating or modifying effects of pregnancy complications.
While we found statistically signiﬁcant 3-way interactions in our
analyses, we also cannot rule out the possibility that this might be due
to chance, thus future studies are needed to replicate these ﬁndings.
Nonetheless, we found similar interaction patterns across two air
pollution indicators (BC and PM2.5) as well as in sensitivity analyses

276

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

using raw birth weight as the outcome with or without adjusting for
gestational age (all p-Values for 3-way interactions o 0.03), which
further suggest the robustness of our ﬁndings. Finally, our results may
be more applicable to lower SES racial/ethnic minority populations which
may not represent the overall population of the U.S. In summary, this is
the ﬁrst study to concurrently examine the role of sex and maternal
obesity in the association between air pollution and birth outcomes. Our
ﬁndings suggest complex interactive roles of maternal obesity and sex on
susceptibility to prenatal trafﬁc-related air pollution exposure in
relation to fetal growth. Future studies in different SES and
racial/ethnic groups with larger sample sizes are needed to both
replicate these ﬁndings and to more fully elucidate the underlying
mechanisms that may explain these complex interactions. Given that low
birth weight has been associated with increased infant mortality as well
as a number of adverse health impacts over the life course among
survivors (Barker, 2003; Fisher et al., 2006; Johnson and Schoeni, 2011;
McIntire et al., 1999), these ﬁndings have even broader public health
implications.

Acknowledgment The Asthma Coalition on Community, Environment, and
Social Stress (ACCESS) project has been funded by Grants R01 ES010932,
U01 HL072494, R01 HL080674 (Wright RJ, PI), and biostatistical support
was funded by NIH grant (P30 ES000002) (Coull BA). The authors declare
they have no competing ﬁnancial interests. The research protocol was
approved by the Human Subjects Committees at the Brigham and Women's
Hospital, and Boston Medical Center, and each participant provided
written informed consent before participating in the study.

References Al-Hinai, M., Al-Muqbali, M., Al-Moqbali, A., Gowri, V.,
Al-Maniri, A., 2013. Effects of pre-pregnancy body mass index and
gestational weight gain on low birth weight in Omani Infants: a
case-control study. Sultan Qaboos Univ. Med. J. 13, 386--391. Baja,
E.S., Schwartz, J.D., Wellenius, G.A., Coull, B.A., Zanobetti, A.,
Vokonas, P.S., et al., 2010. Trafﬁc-related air pollution and QT
interval: modiﬁcation by diabetes, obesity, and oxidative stress gene
polymorphisms in the normative aging study. Environ. Health Perspect.
118, 840--846. Barker, D.J., 2003. The developmental origins of adult
disease. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 18, 733--736. Bell, M.L., Ebisu, K.,
Belanger, K., 2008. The relationship between air pollution and low birth
weight: effects by mother's age, infant sex, co-pollutants, and preterm
births. Environ. Res. Lett. 3, 44003. Berry, C.A., Shalowitz, M., Quinn,
K., Wolf, R., 2001. Validation of the crisis in family systems-revised,
a contemporary measure of life stressors. Psychol. Rep. 88, 713--724.
Bonzini, M., Carugno, M., Grillo, P., Mensi, C., Bertazzi, P.A.,
Pesatori, A.C., 2010. Impact of ambient air pollution on birth outcomes:
systematic review of the current evidences. Med. Lav. 101, 341--363.
Brown, J.E., Potter, J.D., Jacobs Jr., D.R., Kopher, R.A., Rourke, M.J.,
Barosso, G.M., et al., 1996. Maternal waist-to-hip ratio as a predictor
of newborn size: results of the Diana project. Epidemiology 7, 62--66.
Casanueva, E., Viteri, F.E., 2003. Iron and oxidative stress in
pregnancy. J. Nutr. 133, 1700S--1708S. CDC, 2012. Overweight and
obesity. 〈http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/adult/deﬁning. html〉. Challier,
J.C., Basu, S., Bintein, T., Minium, J., Hotmire, K., Catalano, P.M., et
al., 2008. Obesity in pregnancy stimulates macrophage accumulation and
inﬂammation in the placenta. Placenta 29, 274--281. Chiu, Y.H., Coull,
B.A., Cohen, S., Wooley, A., Wright, R.J., 2012. Prenatal and postnatal
maternal stress and wheeze in urban children: effect of maternal
sensitization. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 186, 147--154. Chiu, Y.H.,
Coull, B.A., Sternthal, M.J., Kloog, I., Schwartz, J., Cohen, S., et
al., 2014. Effects of prenatal community violence and ambient air
pollution on childhood wheeze in an urban population. J. Allergy Clin.
Immunol. 133, 713--722, e714.

Choi, H., Perera, F.P., 2012. Sources of greater fetal vulnerability to
airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons among African Americans. J.
Epidemiol. Community Health 66, 121--126. Cohen, A.J., Ross Anderson,
H., Ostro, B., Pandey, K.D., Krzyzanowski, M., Kunzli, N., et al., 2005.
The global burden of disease due to outdoor air pollution. J. Toxicol.
Environ. Health A 68, 1301--1307. Dadvand, P., Parker, J., Bell, M.L.,
Bonzini, M., Brauer, M., Darrow, L.A., et al., 2013. Maternal exposure
to particulate air pollution and term birth weight: a multicountry
evaluation of effect and heterogeneity. Environ. Health Perspect. 121,
267--373. Dailey, D.E., 2009. Social stressors and strengths as
predictors of infant birth weight in low-income African American women.
Nurs. Res. 58, 340--347. Donaldson, K., Stone, V., Seaton, A., MacNee,
W., 2001. Ambient particle inhalation and the cardiovascular system:
potential mechanisms. Environ. Health Perspect. 109 (Suppl 4), 523--527.
Dubowsky, S.D., Suh, H., Schwartz, J., Coull, B.A., Gold, D.R., 2006.
Diabetes, obesity, and hypertension may enhance associations between air
pollution and markers of systemic inﬂammation. Environ. Health Perspect.
114, 992--998. Ferretti, G., Cester, A.M., Bacchetti, T., Raffaelli, F.,
Vignini, A., Orici, F., et al., 2014. Leptin and paraoxonase activity in
cord blood from obese mothers. J. Matern. Fetal Neonatal Med. 27,
1353--1356. Fisher, D., Baird, J., Payne, L., Lucas, P., Kleijnen, J.,
Roberts, H., et al., 2006. Are infant size and growth related to burden
of disease in adulthood? A systematic review of literature. Int. J.
Epidemiol. 35, 1196--1210. Genereux, M., Auger, N., Goneau, M., Daniel,
M., 2008. Neighbourhood socioeconomic status, maternal education and
adverse birth outcomes among mothers living near highways. J. Epidemiol.
Community Health 62, 695--700. Ghosh, J.K., Wilhelm, M., Su, J.,
Goldberg, D., Cockburn, M., Jerrett, M., et al., 2012. Assessing the
inﬂuence of trafﬁc-related air pollution on risk of term low birth
weight on the basis of land-use-based regression models and measures of
air toxics. Am. J. Epidemiol. 175, 1262--1274. Ghosh, R., Rankin, J.,
Pless-Mulloli, T., Glinianaia, S., 2007. Does the effect of air
pollution on pregnancy outcomes differ by gender? A systematic review.
Environ. Res. 105, 400--408. Gryparis, A., Coull, B.A., Schwartz, J.,
Suh, H.H., 2007. Semiparametric latent variable regression models for
spatiotemporal modelling of mobile source particles in the greater
Boston area. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. C: Appl. Stat. 56, 183--209. Herraiz,
I., Droge, L.A., Gomez-Montes, E., Henrich, W., Galindo, A., Verlohren,
S., 2014. Characterization of the soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 to
placental growth factor ratio in pregnancies complicated by fetal growth
restriction. Obstet. Gynecol. 124, 265--273. Hinkle, S.N., Albert, P.S.,
Mendola, P., Sjaarda, L.A., Yeung, E., Boghossian, N.S., et al., 2014.
The association between parity and birthweight in a longitudinal
consecutive pregnancy cohort. Paediatr. Perinat. Epidemiol. 28,
106--115. Hoeben, A., Landuyt, B., Highley, M.S., Wildiers, H., Van
Oosterom, A.T., De Bruijn, E. A., 2004. Vascular endothelial growth
factor and angiogenesis. Pharmacol. Rev. 56, 549--580. Hoffman, C.S.,
Messer, L.C., Mendola, P., Savitz, D.A., Herring, A.H., Hartmann, K.E.,
2008. Comparison of gestational age at birth based on last menstrual
period and ultrasound during the ﬁrst trimester. Paediatr. Perinat.
Epidemiol. 22, 587--596. Hotamisligil, G.S., 2006. Inﬂammation and
metabolic disorders. Nature 444, 860--867. Hyder, A., Lee, H.J., Ebisu,
K., Koutrakis, P., Belanger, K., Bell, M.L., 2014. PM2.5 exposure and
birth outcomes: use of satellite- and monitor-based data. Epidemiology
25, 58--67. Janssen, B.G., Munters, E., Pieters, N., Smeets, K., Cox,
B., Cuypers, A., et al., 2012. Placental mitochondrial DNA content and
particulate air pollution during in utero life. Environ. Health
Perspect. 120, 1346--1352. Jedrychowski, W., Perera, F., Mrozek-Budzyn,
D., Mroz, E., Flak, E., Spengler, J.D., et al., 2009. Gender differences
in fetal growth of newborns exposed prenatally to airborne ﬁne
particulate matter. Environ. Res. 109, 447--456. Johnson, R.C., Schoeni,
R.F., 2011. Early-life origins of adult disease: national longitudinal
population-based study of the United States. Am. J. Public Health 101,
2317--2324. Kannan, S., Misra, D.P., Dvonch, J.T., Krishnakumar, A.,
2006. Exposures to airborne particulate matter and adverse perinatal
outcomes: a biologically plausible mechanistic framework for exploring
potential effect modiﬁcation by nutrition. Environ. Health Perspect.
114, 1636--1642. Kloog, I., Koutrakis, P., Coull, B.A., Lee, H.J.,
Schwartz, J., 2011. Assessing temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5
exposures for epidemiological studies using satellite aerosol optical
depth measurements. Atmos. Environ. 45, 6267--6275. Kloog, I., Melly,
S.J., Ridgway, W.L., Coull, B.A., Schwartz, J., 2012. Using new
satellite based exposure methods to study the association between
pregnancy PM2.5 exposure, premature birth and birth weight in
Massachusetts. Environ. Health 11, 40. Lampl, M., Gotsch, F., Kusanovic,
J.P., Gomez, R., Nien, J.K., Frongillo, E.A., et al., 2010. Sex
differences in fetal growth responses to maternal height and weight. Am.
J. Hum. Biol. 22, 431--443. Lee, P.C., Roberts, J.M., Catov, J.M.,
Talbott, E.O., Ritz, B., 2013. First trimester exposure to ambient air
pollution, pregnancy complications and adverse birth outcomes in
Allegheny County, PA. Matern. Child Health J. 17, 545--555. Linton,
E.A., Perkins, A.V., Woods, R.J., Eben, F., Wolfe, C.D., Behan, D.P., et
al., 1993. Corticotropin releasing hormone-binding protein (CRH-BP):
plasma levels decrease during the third trimester of normal human
pregnancy. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 76, 260--262.

A. Lakshmanan et al. / Environmental Research 137 (2015) 268--277

Madsen, C., Gehring, U., Walker, S.E., Brunekreef, B., Stigum, H.,
Naess, O., et al., 2010. Ambient air pollution exposure, residential
mobility and term birth weight in Oslo, Norway. Environ. Res. 110,
363--371. Makri, A., Stilianakis, N.I., 2008. Vulnerability to air
pollution health effects. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 211, 326--336.
Malmqvist, E., Jakobsson, K., Tinnerberg, H., Rignell-Hydbom, A.,
Rylander, L., 2013. Gestational diabetes and preeclampsia in association
with air pollution at levels below current air quality guidelines.
Environ. Health Perspect. 121, 488--493. McGrath, J.J., Barnett, A.G.,
Eyles, D.W., 2005. The association between birth weight, season of birth
and latitude. Ann. Hum. Biol. 32, 547--559. McIntire, D.D., Bloom, S.L.,
Casey, B.M., Leveno, K.J., 1999. Birth weight in relation to morbidity
and mortality among newborn infants. N. Engl. J. Med. 340, 1234--1238.
Meng, G., Thompson, M.E., Hall, G.B., 2013. Pathways of
neighbourhood-level socioeconomic determinants of adverse birth
outcomes. Int. J. Health Geogr. 12, 32. Minghetti, L., Greco, A.,
Zanardo, V., Suppiej, A., 2013. Early-life sex-dependent vulnerability
to oxidative stress: the natural twining model. J. Matern.-Fetal
Neonatal Med. 26, 259--262. Murray, L.J., O'Reilly, D.P., Betts, N.,
Patterson, C.C., Davey Smith, G., Evans, A.E., 2000. Season and outdoor
ambient temperature: effects on birth weight. Obstet. Gynecol. 96,
689--695. Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J., Dadvand, P., Grellier, J., Martinez, D.,
Vrijheid, M., 2013. Environmental risk factors of pregnancy outcomes: a
summary of recent metaanalyses of epidemiological studies. Environ.
Health 12, 6. O'Neill, M.S., Jerrett, M., Kawachi, I., Levy, J.I.,
Cohen, A.J., Gouveia, N., et al., 2003. Health, wealth, and air
pollution: advancing theory and methods. Environ. Health Perspect. 111,
1861--1870. Oken, E., Kleinman, K.P., Rich-Edwards, J., Gillman, M.W.,
2003. A nearly continuous measure of birth weight for gestational age
using a United States national reference. BMC Pediatr. 3, 6. Ordovas,
J.M., Corella, D., 2004. Genes, diet and plasma lipids: the evidence
from observational studies. World Rev. Nutr. Diet. 93, 41--76. Patil,
S.B., Kodliwadmath, M.V., Kodliwadmath, S.M., 2007. Study of oxidative
stress and enzymatic antioxidants in normal pregnancy. Indian J. Clin.
Biochem. 22, 135--137. Pedersen, M., Giorgis-Allemand, L., Bernard, C.,
Aguilera, I., Andersen, A.M., Ballester, F., et al., 2013. Ambient air
pollution and low birthweight: a European cohort study (ESCAPE). Lancet
Respir. Med. 1, 695--704. Ponce, N.A., Hoggatt, K.J., Wilhelm, M., Ritz,
B., 2005. Preterm birth: the interaction of trafﬁc-related air pollution
with economic hardship in Los Angeles neighborhoods. Am. J. Epidemiol.
162, 140--148. Proietti, E., Roosli, M., Frey, U., Latzin, P., 2013. Air
pollution during pregnancy and neonatal outcome: a review. J. Aerosol
Med. Pulm. Drug Deliv. 26, 9--23. Rajasingam, D., Seed, P.T., Briley,
A.L., Shennan, A.H., Poston, L., 2009. A prospective study of pregnancy
outcome and biomarkers of oxidative stress in nulliparous obese women.
Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 200, 395.e1--395.e9. Rich, D.Q., Demissie, K.,
Lu, S.E., Kamat, L., Wartenberg, D., Rhoads, G.G., 2009. Ambient air
pollutant concentrations during pregnancy and the risk of fetal growth
restriction. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 63, 488--496. Ritz, B.,
Wilhelm, M., 2008. Ambient air pollution and adverse birth outcomes:
methodologic issues in an emerging ﬁeld. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol.
102, 182--190. Rogers, J.F., Thompson, S.J., Addy, C.L., McKeown, R.E.,
Cowen, D.J., Decouﬂe, P., 2000. Association of very low birth weight
with exposures to environmental sulfur dioxide and total suspended
particulates. Am. J. Epidemiol. 151, 602--613. Rytter, D., Bech, B.H.,
Frydenberg, M., Henriksen, T.B., Olsen, S.F., 2014. Fetal growth and
cardio-metabolic risk factors in the 20-year-old offspring. Acta Obstet.
Gynecol. Scand. 93, 1150--1159. Sampson, R.J., Moreno, J.D., Earls, F.,
1999. Beyond Social capital: spatial dynamics of collective efﬁcacy for
children. Am. Sociol. Rev. 64, 633--660. Sen, S., Iyer, C., Meydani,
S.N., 2014. Obesity during pregnancy alters maternal oxidant balance and
micronutrient status. J. Perinatol. 34, 105--111. Shah, P.S., Balkhair,
T., 2011. Air pollution and birth outcomes: a systematic review.
Environ. Int. 37, 498--516. Shalowitz, M.U., Berry, C.A., Rasinski,
K.A., Dannhausen-Brun, C.A., 1998. A new measure of contemporary life
stress: development, validation, and reliability of the CRISYS. Health
Serv. Res. 33, 1382--1402.

277

Slama, R., Darrow, L., Parker, J., Woodruff, T.J., Strickland, M.,
Nieuwenhuijsen, M., et al., 2008. Meeting report: atmospheric pollution
and human reproduction. Environ. Health Perspect. 116, 791--798. Sram,
R.J., Binkova, B., Dejmek, J., Bobak, M., 2005. Ambient air pollution
and pregnancy outcomes: a review of the literature. Environ. Health
Perspect. 113, 375--382. Sridhar, S.B., Darbinian, J., Ehrlich, S.F.,
Markman, M.A., Gunderson, E.P., Ferrara, A., et al., 2014. Maternal
gestational weight gain and offspring risk for childhood overweight or
obesity. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 211, 259.e1--259.e8. Stewart, F.M.,
Freeman, D.J., Ramsay, J.E., Greer, I.A., Caslake, M., Ferrell, W.R.,
2007. Longitudinal assessment of maternal endothelial function and
markers of inﬂammation and placental function throughout pregnancy in
lean and obese mothers. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 92, 969--975. Stieb,
D.M., Chen, L., Eshoul, M., Judek, S., 2012. Ambient air pollution,
birth weight and preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Environ. Res. 117, 100--111. Tustin, K., Gross, J., Hayne, H., 2004.
Maternal exposure to ﬁrst-trimester sunshine is associated with
increased birth weight in human infants. Dev. Psychobiol. 45, 221--230.
van den Hooven, E.H., Pierik, F.H., de Kluizenaar, Y., Hofman, A., van
Ratingen, S.W., Zandveld, P.Y., et al., 2012. Air pollution exposure and
markers of placental growth and function: the generation R study.
Environ. Health Perspect. 120, 1753--1759. Veras, M.M.,
Damaceno-Rodrigues, N.R., Caldini, E.G., Maciel Ribeiro, A.A., Mayhew,
T.M., Saldiva, P.H., et al., 2008. Particulate urban air pollution
affects the functional morphology of mouse placenta. Biol. Reprod. 79,
578--584. Waldie, K.E., Poulton, R., Kirk, I.J., Silva, P.A., 2000. The
effects of pre- and post-natal sunlight exposure on human growth:
evidence from the Southern Hemisphere. Early Hum. Dev. 60, 35--42.
Wallace, D., 2011. Discriminatory mass de-housing and low-weight births:
scales of geography, time, and level. J. Urban Health 88, 454--468.
Wang, X., Ding, H., Ryan, L., Xu, X., 1997. Association between air
pollution and low birth weight: a community-based study. Environ. Health
Perspect. 105, 514--520. Weber, D., Stuetz, W., Bernhard, W., Franz, A.,
Raith, M., Grune, T., et al., 2014. Oxidative stress markers and
micronutrients in maternal and cord blood in relation to neonatal
outcome. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 68, 215--222. Wilhelm, M., Ghosh, J.K., Su,
J., Cockburn, M., Jerrett, M., Ritz, B., 2012. Trafﬁc-related air toxics
and term low birth weight in Los Angeles County, California. Environ.
Health Perspect. 120, 132--138. Wilhelm, M., Ritz, B., 2003. Residential
proximity to trafﬁc and adverse birth outcomes in Los Angeles county,
California, 1994--1996. Environ. Health Perspect. 111, 207--216. Winder,
N.R., Krishnaveni, G.V., Veena, S.R., Hill, J.C., Karat, C.L.,
Thornburg, K.L., et al., 2011. Mother's lifetime nutrition and the size,
shape and efﬁciency of the placenta. Placenta 32, 806--810. Wood, S.N.,
2006. Generalized Additive Models: An introduction with R, .. Chapman &
Hall/CRC, FL. Woodruff, T.J., Parker, J.D., Kyle, A.D., Schoendorf,
K.C., 2003. Disparities in exposure to air pollution during pregnancy.
Environ. Health Perspect. 111, 942--946. Wright, R.J., Fisher, K., Chiu,
Y.H., Wright, R.O., Fein, R., Cohen, S., et al., 2013. Disrupted
prenatal maternal cortisol, maternal obesity, and childhood wheeze.
Insights into prenatal programming. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 187,
1186--1193. Wright, R.J., Suglia, S.F., Levy, J., Fortun, K., Shields,
A., Subramanian, S., et al., 2008. Transdisciplinary research strategies
for understanding socially patterned disease: the Asthma Coalition on
Community, Environment, and Social Stress (ACCESS) project as a case
study. Cien Saude Colet 13, 1729--1742. Yorifuji, T., Naruse, H.,
Kashima, S., Murakoshi, T., Tsuda, T., Doi, H., et al., 2012.
Residential proximity to major roads and placenta/birth weight ratio.
Sci. Total Environ. 414, 98--102. Zeka, A., Melly, S.J., Schwartz, J.,
2008. The effects of socioeconomic status and indices of physical
environment on reduced birth weight and preterm births in Eastern
Massachusetts. Environ. Health 7, 60. Zhang, W.J., Sun, Y.L., Zhuang,
G.S., Xu, D.Q., 2006. Characteristics and seasonal variations of PM2.5,
PM10, and TSP aerosol in Beijing. Biomed. Environ. Sci. 19, 461--468.


