Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2015), 1--8
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved 1559-0631/15

www.nature.com/jes

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Spatiotemporal prediction of ﬁne particulate matter using
high-resolution satellite images in the Southeastern US 2003--2011 Mihye
Lee1, Itai Kloog2, Alexandra Chudnovsky3, Alexei Lyapustin4, Yujie
Wang5, Steven Melly6, Brent Coull7, Petros Koutrakis1 and Joel Schwartz1
Numerous studies have demonstrated that ﬁne particulate matter (PM2.5,
particles smaller than 2.5 μm in aerodynamic diameter) is associated
with adverse health outcomes. The use of ground monitoring stations of
PM2.5 to assess personal exposure, however, induces measurement error.
Land-use regression provides spatially resolved predictions but land-use
terms do not vary temporally. Meanwhile, the advent of
satellite-retrieved aerosol optical depth (AOD) products have made
possible to predict the spatial and temporal patterns of PM2.5
exposures. In this paper, we used AOD data with other PM2.5 variables,
such as meteorological variables, land-use regression, and spatial
smoothing to predict daily concentrations of PM2.5 at a 1-km2 resolution
of the Southeastern United States including the seven states of Georgia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, Alabama, Tennessee, Mississippi, and
Florida for the years from 2003 to 2011. We divided the study area into
three regions and applied separate mixed-effect models to calibrate AOD
using ground PM2.5 measurements and other spatiotemporal predictors.
Using 10-fold cross-validation, we obtained out of sample R2 values of
0.77, 0.81, and 0.70 with the square root of the mean squared prediction
errors of 2.89, 2.51, and 2.82 μg/m3 for regions 1, 2, and 3,
respectively. The slopes of the relationships between predicted PM2.5
and held out measurements were approximately 1 indicating no bias
between the observed and modeled PM2.5 concentrations. Predictions can
be used in epidemiological studies investigating the effects of both
acute and chronic exposures to PM2.5. Our model results will also extend
the existing studies on PM2.5 which have mostly focused on urban areas
because of the paucity of monitors in rural areas. Journal of Exposure
Science and Environmental Epidemiology advance online publication, 17
June 2015; doi:10.1038/jes.2015.41 Keywords: empirical/statistical
models; exposure modeling; particulate matter; personal exposure

INTRODUCTION Since the Six Cities study,1 which showed a strong linear
relationship between PM2.5 and mortality between cities that differed by
pollution level, a body of literature has reported effects of PM2.5 on
mortality and morbidity.2--4 In many of those studies, the PM2.5
exposures were assessed by using concentration data obtained at a
central monitoring site located in a jurisdiction or within a speciﬁed
distance. However, this approach introduces information bias, and thus
leads to attenuation of the magnitude of effects of air pollution or
increases the variance of estimate.5--7 Many studies have attempted to
address this issue and to produce PM2.5 concentrations for locations
distant from the monitors.8--10 This includes predicting PM2.5 levels
using regression models based on geographic covariates such as land-use
regressions or geostatistical interpolation methods such as
Kriging.8,11,12 However, predictions from a land-use regression are
limited to longterm exposures for chronic health effects studies, since
the geographic covariates are mostly not time varying.13 Moreover, if
the amount of pollution due to a geographic predictor, for example,
trafﬁc density, changes over time because of control

technology, this is not easily incorporated into land-use regression.
Geostatistical methods also have limitations because of the low density
of monitoring stations, rendering the results unreliable especially in
rural areas. Meanwhile, the aerosol optical depth (AOD) values from the
Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite provide
daily measurements for the entire earth. AOD is a measure of particles
in a column of air and is related to PM2.5.14 With the advent of a new
processing algorithm called Multi-Angle Implementation of Atmospheric
Correction (MAIAC),15 the spatial resolution of AOD has further improved
from 10 × 10 km2 to 1 × 1 km2. Since the relationship between the AOD
measurement and PM2.5 is affected by various factors such as the optical
properties of particulates, mixing height, and humidity, which vary
daily, we used a mixed-effect model with daily random slopes for daily
calibration rather than a general regression. This provides better
predictive performance than other studies using the satellite imagery
for the PM2.5 prediction without daily calibration.16 In this paper, we
used AOD satellite data and predictors such as meteorological variables,
land-use regression, and spatial

1 Exposure, Epidemiology, and Risk Program, Department of Environmental
Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;
2Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; 3Department of Geography
and Human Environment, Tel-Aviv University, Israel; 4GEST/ UMBC, NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; 5University of
Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; 6Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Drexel University School of Public
Health, Philadelphia, Pensylvania, USA and 7Department of Biostatistics,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Correspondence: Dr. Mihye Lee, Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program,
Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA. Tel.: 617 998 1027. Fax: 617 384 8745. E-mail:
mil724@mail.harvard.edu Received 8 January 2015; revised 8 April 2015;
accepted 27 April 2015

PM2.5 prediction using 1- km satellite data Lee et al

2 smoothing to predict the daily concentration of PM2.5 at a 1-km2
resolution across the Southeastern United States, including seven states
of Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Alabama, Tennessee,
Mississippi, and Florida for the years 2003 to 2011.

calculated for each 1-km grid cell. For the location of geographical
predictors such as roads, major buildings, ports, airports, and water
bodies, spatial data from ESRI Data & Maps 2004 were used (ArcGIS and
ArcMap by Esri, Copyright Esri).

DATA Ground Particulate Matter Measurements We obtained PM2.5 mass
concentration data from Federal Reference Method monitors operated by
the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and monitors with a teﬂon
ﬁlter in the Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments
program for a total of 257 monitoring sites.

METHODS Date Preparation

Aerosol Optical Depth Data The MAIAC data were obtained from the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at the resolution
of 1 km2. AOD data were delivered by tiles, which is the unit of spatial
domain of MODIS image with an area of 10 × 10° at the equator. Our study
used tiles h00v03, h01v02, h01v03, h01v04, h02v02, and h02v03. The data
include the latitude and longitude in the WGS84 coordinate system, the
corresponding AOD values, and a quality ﬂag. We deleted AOD values
higher than 1.5 likely reﬂecting cloud contamination and AOD values over
water bodies since the water reﬂects light and affects the reliability
of AOD readings. The AOD value which was the closest in distance within
a 1- km buffer was assigned to each PM2.5 measurement. To compare the
new MAIAC data at a 1- km2 resolution with the existing data at a 10-
km2 resolution, we decided to use the existing AOD data that we had
retained. For the years 2000 − 2010, MODIS level 2 ﬁles from the Earth
Observing System Terra satellite were used to extract AOD values at a 10
km × 10 -km resolution. Meteorological Data We downloaded weather data
from the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC, 2010) website. Weather
variables include temperature, relative humidity, wind speed,
visibility, and sea level pressure in the form of the daily mean. A
total of 144 weather stations were used and we assigned the weather
readings based on the closest distance on a speciﬁc data. Normalized
Difference Vegetation Index NASA provides normalized difference
vegetation index (NDVI) data from the MODIS sensor. We aggregated NDVI
measurements to a 1- km grid and a 1 month average. Speciﬁcally we used
the Terra satellite product ID of MOD13A3. Height of Planetary Boundary
Layer We obtained the daily height of planetary boundary layer (PBL)
from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Reanalysis Data. The pixel resolution of PBL data was 32 × 32 km on a
daily basis. To represent the daily PBL height, the 24-h mean was used.
Land Use Variables Emissions of PM2.5, PM10, and NOx from point sources
and county area level emissions, were downloaded from National Emission
Inventory (NEI) data for 2005 from the website of the environmental
protection agency (EPA 2005 NEI). To produce the percentage of urbanism
for each satellite grid cell at 1-km2 resolution, we used the national
land cover database for 2011 (NLCD 2011) data at 30-m resolution.17 We
reclassiﬁed land cover codes 22 (developed, low intensity), 23
(developed, medium intensity), and 24 (developed, high intensity) to 1
as an urban cell and assigned 0 for the rest of codes. The mean of
binary vales was Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental
Epidemiology (2015), 1 -- 8

For each day, we assigned the closest AOD readings within a 1-km buffer
of PM monitors. We conﬁned our analysis to PM2.5 o 80 μg/m3 to eliminate
inﬂuential outliers (25 observations among the total of 260,476 PM2.5
measurements for 9 years). We also restricted our analysis to cells
greater or equal in population to 10, since the Southeastern US includes
less populated areas. AOD values 40.5 which corresponded to PM2.5 o10
μg/m3 were removed because it is likely they are because of cloud
contamination. Data with AOD o0.15 and PM2.5425 μg/m3 were removed
because we decided it is likely on those days that low PBL moved
particles closer to ground level, deteriorating the relationship between
AOD and ground-level PM2.5 measurements. The aim of our model lies in
high-performance predication, not associational inference between the
exposure and outcome such as in the epidemiological studies. Hence, our
strategy was to eliminate observations with high residuals over 10 μg/m3
as too likely to distort our predictions for most observations, and to
choose a model based on maximizing cross-validated (CV) R2. AOD values
are not missing at random (for example there are more missing in the
winter) which can distort the predictions. Thus, we used inverse
probability weighting to account for this selection bias. Finally, the
calibration between AOD and PM2.5 can vary spatially, and daily. The
daily variation is because of changes in particle size distribution,
color, and vertical proﬁle, and we address this by daily calibration and
by using PBL data in the model using mixed-effect models with the random
intercept and slopes for day. To account for spatial differences in
these daily slopes, we nested them within subregions, and to account for
more permanent differences between locations, we included land-use terms
in our model. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁtted the following model:       E
PM2:5ij ¼ β0 þ b0j þ b0jk þ β1 þ b1j þ b2jk AODij 7 15 X X   þ β2 þ
b2j tempij þ β1m X 1mij þ β2n X 2ni m¼1

þ β25 AOD ´ PBL;

n¼1

ð1Þ

where PM2:5ij is the PM2.5 measurements at the monitoring site i on day
j. β0 is the intercept for the ﬁxed effect (the population intercept)
and b0j is the overall random intercept which varies by day. b0jk is the
random intercept for day nested in each subregion. Similarly, β1 is the
slope for the ﬁxed effect of AOD, b1i is the overall slope for the
random effect of AOD for the day, and b2jk is the random slope for each
day nested in each subregion. AOD is the AOD measurement that is used
for the monitoring site i within 1 km of the site on day j. β2 and b2j
represent the slopes for the ﬁxed effect and the random effect of
temperature, respectively. temp is the temperature that is measured by
the closest weather monitor to the site i on day j. β1m is the slopes
for the ﬁxed effect of spatiotemporal variables. X1mij is the matrix of
mth spatiotemporal covariates on the site i and day j other than
temperature and consists of seven variables: dew point temperature; sea
level pressure; visibility; wind speed; absolute humidity; NDVI in the
corresponding month; and PBL. β2n is the slopes for the ﬁxed effect of
spatial variables. X2ni is the matrix of 15 spatial covariates for the
ith site which includes the percent urbanicity, elevation, the density
of major roads, population within 10 km diameter, PM2.5 emissions at
county level, PM2.5 emissions from point sources, PM10 emission from
point sources, NOx emission from point sources, canopy surface in 2001,
distance to the closest A1 roads, distance to the closest airport,
distance to the closest port, distance to the closest railroad, distance
to a closest road, and distance to a major building. Observations with
residuals over 10 μg/m3 were revisited and we determined their validity
by comparing PM2.5 readings from the surrounding monitors and the
previous day and the next day. If we determined them to be erroneous, we
assigned the readings from the closest monitoring station within 15 km.

Model Because of the vast study area, a single model was not able to
achieve the best performance in prediction. The Southeastern US consists
of various areas with different topography, climate (tropical in
Florida), and © 2015 Nature America, Inc.

PM2.5 prediction using 1- km satellite data Lee et al

3

Figure 1.

Study area and the locations of PM2.5 monitoring stations.

geographic features such as swamps and forests. Therefore, we decided to
split the study area into three regions and to ﬁt separate models for
each region and implement nested random coefﬁcients for subregions
within each region (Figure 1). Region 1 consist of Tennessee,
Mississippi, Alabama, and Georgia. Region 2 covers North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Georgia. Lastly, region 3 covers Florida, Mississippi,
Alabama, Georgia, and South Carolina. AOD measurement cannot be made
because of various factors such as cloud or snow cover. We hypothesized
that the cloud formation and snow cover is affected by weather
conditions including temperature, wind speed, sea level pressure,
elevation, and the season. Therefore, to adjust the nonrandom
missingness of AOD, we modeled inverse probability weights (IPW) and
applied them to the ﬁrst stage models. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁtted the
following logistic model for the missingness of AOD measurements:
EðlogitðpÞÞ ¼ β0 þ β1 tempij þ β2 WSij þ β3 SLPij þ β4 elevi þ β5 monj ;

ð2Þ

where temp is temperature of cell i on day j, WSij is wind speed of cell
i on day j, SLPij is the sea level pressure of cell i on day j, elev is
the elevation of cell i, and mon is the corresponding month that day j
falls in. Using the probability of the outcome (missing or not), we
computed the inverse probability as, 1p. Next, we normalized IPW values
by dividing them by their mean. These were applied to the subsequent
models as a weight. Each of the models corresponding to the three
regions was evaluated using a 10-fold cross-validation to avoid
overﬁtting. We adopted a different approach in cross-validation which
other similar studies performed recordbased cross-validation. We
conducted site-based cross-validation since we believed that
cross-validation by monitoring stations was more appropriate, so that it
assesses the capabilities of the models to predict spatial variability.
Firstly, we made a randomly ordered list of monitoring stations in each
region. The station list then was split into 10 subsets. In turn, 90% of
the monitoring stations were used to ﬁt the model and 10 % of stations
were used to test the model performance. This cross-validation were
conducted for 10 times for each region. The site-based 10-fold
crossvalidated R2 was used for ﬁnalizing the models rather than modeled
R2 as well as for assessing the model performance and for avoiding
overﬁtting. As a result, we ended up the following models based on the
highest R2 from the 10-fold cross-validation.

© 2015 Nature America, Inc.

In region 1, we ﬁtted the following model for each year with the IPW: 
     E PM2:5ij ¼ β0 þ b0j þ b0jk þ β1 þ b1j þ b1jk AODij þ β2
tempij þ β3 dewpij þ β4 slpij þ β5 wdspij þ β6 visibij þ β7 ahij þ β8
NDVI þ β9 elevi þ β10 pblij þ β11 urbi þ β12 emissioni þ β13 PM10i þ β14
NOXi ;

ð3Þ

where PM2:5ij is the PM2.5 measurements at the monitoring site i on day
j. β0 denotes the ﬁxed effect intercept term (population intercept) and
b0j is the random effect intercept varies randomly from one day to
another. b0jk is the random intercept for day nested in each subregion.
Similarly, β1 is the slope for the ﬁxed effect of AOD, b1i is the slope
for the random effect of AOD for each day, and b2jk is the random slope
for each day nested in each subregion. AOD is the AOD measurement that
is used for the monitoring site i within 1 km of the site on day j. temp
is the temperature that is measured by the closest weather monitor to
the site i on day j. dewp is the dew point that is measured by the
closest weather monitor to the site i on day j. slp is the sea level
pressure in millibars that is measured by the closest weather monitor to
the site i on day j. wdsp is the wind speed in knots that is measured by
the closest weather monitor to the site i on day j. visib is the
visibility in miles that is measured by the closest weather monitor to
the site i on day j. elev is the elevation of the site i. pbl is the
height of the planetary boundary layer at the site i on day j. urb is
the percentage of urbaness at the site i. emission is the annual
emission of PM2.5 in ton from the closest point source such as an
industrial factory. PM10 is the annual emission of PM10 in ton from the
closest point source such as an industrial factory. NOX is the annual
emission of NOX in ton from the closest point source such as an
industrial factory. In region 2, we ﬁtted the following model for each
year with the IPW:       E PM2:5ij ¼ β0 þ b0j þ b0jk þ β1 þ b1j þ
b1jk AODij þ β2 tempij þ β3 dewpij þ β4 slpij þ β5 wdspij þ β6 visibij þ
β7 ahij þ β8 NDVI þ β9 elevi þ β10 pblij þ β11 urbi þ β12 emission:

ð4Þ

Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2015), 1 --
8

PM2.5 prediction using 1- km satellite data Lee et al

4 For the third region, we ﬁtted the following model for each year with
the IPW:       E PM2:5ij ¼ β0 þ b0j þ b0jk þ β1 þ b1j þ b1jk AODij
þ β2 tempij þ β3 dewpij þ β4 slpij þ β5 wdspij þ β6 visibij þ β7 ahij :

in the second stage. Speciﬁcally, we applied the following model with
the IPW.     PredPM2:5ij ¼ β0 þ b0j þ b0jk þ sðlati ; longi Þ

ð5Þ

þ ðβ1 þ b1ik ÞMPMij þ β2 bimonij þ β3 pblij

2

Besides the overall R from the 10-fold cross-validation, we estimated a
spatial R2 by regressing the annual mean of observed PM2.5 against that
of predicted one for each site. To assess the precision of the
predictions, root mean squared prediction error (RMSPE) was generated by
taking the square root of the mean of squared prediction residuals. A
temporal R2 was calculated by regressing the difference between the
actual PM2.5 measurement on a speciﬁc day and the annual mean for each
site against the equivalent for the predicted values from the model.
Once we ﬁnalized the calibration models by three regions as above, we
predicted PM2.5 levels based on the coefﬁcients for AOD values and other
temporal and spatial variables. For the areas and days with AOD missing,
we interpolated those cells using the surrounding cells that had AOD
values and thus had predictions

Table 1. Year 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Figure 2.

þ β4 ahgm 3ij þ β5 elevij þ β6 mpm ´ bimonij þ β7 mpm ´ pblij ;

ð6Þ

where PredPMij is the predicted PM2.5 level at a grid cell i on a day j
in stage 2. lati and longi are the latitude and longitude coordinates of
the cell i, respectively; and s() is a smooth function of thin plate
splines. MPMij is the mean PM2.5 measured at monitoring stations within
a 100-km buffer for the cell i on day j. Since the purpose of the
analysis of the 10-km data is to compare the performance of two data, we
conducted the ﬁrst stage model only. During the modeling, we applied
same procedures as above with the same model with same variables,
calibration, and IPW to make a fair comparison. As for software, MATLAB
2014b was used to extract the AOD readings from the raw satellite image
in the HDF format and ArcGIS Desktop 10.2.2 was used along with python
scripting for data preparation. Models were implemented by using the R
3.02 and SAS 9.3 (Statistical Analysis System).

Descriptive statistics of PM2.5 (μg/m3) and MAIAC AOD Mean PM (SD) 12.2
12.6 13.1 12.6 12.4 10.8 9.4 10.2 9.8

(6.5) (6.6) (7.3) (6.6) (7.5) (5.6) (4.6) (4.9) (5.3)

Mean AOD (SD) 0.18 0.18 0.20 0.20 0.21 0.18 0.17 0.17 0.20

(0.18) (0.17) (0.19) (0.19) (0.21) (0.16) (0.15) (0.15) (0.18)

RESULTS A total of 257 monitoring stations were used for the study.
Figure 1 shows the study area and the locations of PM2.5 monitors. The
study area with the thick boundary line covers most of the seven states
except for the small area of Western Mississippi due to the lack of the
total spatial domain consisting of AOD tiles. The numbers from 1 to 3 in
big bold font indicate the study area region. Region 1 mainly consists
of the states of Tennessee, and the upper part of Mississippi, Alabama,
and Georgia, and contains 61 monitoring stations (0.0003 monitor/km2).
Region 2 includes most of North Carolina, and major parts of South
Carolina, and

Spatial distribution of PM2.5 concentrations between 2003 and 2011.

Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2015), 1 --
8

© 2015 Nature America, Inc.

PM2.5 prediction using 1- km satellite data Lee et al

5 Table 2.

2

Result of site-based 10-fold cross-validation from stage 1 model using
1-km data

Year

Region

R2 (CV)

Slope (CV)

RMSPE (μg/m3)

Spatial R2

Temporal R2

Spatial RMSPE

2003

1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3

0.72 0.83 0.75 0.79 0.80 0.74 0.83 0.80 0.75 0.80 0.84 0.74 0.79 0.85
0.70 0.78 0.78 0.69 0.76 0.78 0.66 0.65 0.80 0.66 0.79 0.78 0.63 0.77
0.81 0.70

0.93 0.98 1.01 0.97 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.97 0.99 0.98 0.99 1.00 0.98 0.99
1.02 0.99 0.98 1.00 0.98 0.99 1.02 0.95 0.99 1.00 0.98 0.98 0.99 0.97
0.99 1.00

3.51 2.67 2.62 2.92 2.77 2.83 3.23 3.12 3.10 2.99 2.70 2.69 3.19 2.54
3.29 2.71 2.48 2.74 2.30 2.05 2.60 2.80 2.09 2.51 2.40 2.21 2.97 2.89
2.51 2.82

0.50 0.59 0.81 0.94 0.52 0.77 0.86 0.81 0.73 0.53 0.70 0.67 0.67 0.59
0.77 0.74 0.60 0.85 0.81 0.81 0.80 0.33 0.46 0.69 0.80 0.55 0.75 0.69
0.63 0.76

0.78 0.84 0.74 0.80 0.81 0.74 0.84 0.81 0.75 0.83 0.85 0.75 0.82 0.86
0.69 0.80 0.79 0.65 0.78 0.79 0.64 0.71 0.81 0.66 0.80 0.79 0.61 0.80
0.82 0.69

1.86 1.03 0.93 1.07 0.79 0.86 1.12 0.93 1.19 1.26 0.86 1.15 1.34 0.84
1.25 0.99 0.79 0.99 0.83 0.78 0.87 1.33 0.68 1.11 0.86 0.69 0.98 1.18
0.82 1.04

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Mean

Georgia with 88 monitors. Region 2 is most densely populated by PM
monitoring stations (0.00038 monitor/km2). Region 3 covers the most
southern part, including Florida and the southern part of Mississippi,
Alabama, Georgia, and South Carolina. Although region 3 has the largest
number of monitors of 108, due to its vast area, the spatial
distribution of PM monitoring stations is most scattered among the three
regions (0.00026 monitor/km2). Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics
for PM2.5 measurements from monitoring stations and AOD measurements by
MAIAC algorithm in the Southeastern US by year from 2003 to 2011. The
annual average of PM2.5 has steadily decreased from 12.2 in 2003 to 9.8
μg/m3 in 2011. The SD has also decreased from 6.5 to 5.3 μg/m3. The mean
AOD readings were on the order of 0.20 (dimensionless) over 9 years.
Figure 2 shows the spatial distribution of PM2.5 concentrations in the
study area, represented by the average PM2.5 levels by monitors during
the study period (2003--2011). Monitoring stations in big cities such as
Atlanta, Nashville, Charlotte, and Birmingham recorded the highest
average PM2.5 level. Monitors at intersections of major highways also
showed the high level of PM2.5. Among the seven study states, Florida
showed the lowest PM2.5 level. Our model showed a highly signiﬁcant
association between PM2.5 and AOD after controlling for other covariates
and spatiotemporal predictors. Table 2 presents results from the stage 1
model where the calibration of AOD and other spatiotemporal predictors
were done by each year and region. The R2 numbers are from the 10-fold
cross-validation based on the sampling of monitors not observations
regardless of monitors. The predictive power of the models differed by
region. Region 2 showed the highest overall R2 of 0.81 with the
year-to-year variation ranging from 0.78 in 2008 to 0.85 in 2007. Region
3 showed the lowest © 2015 Nature America, Inc.

Table 3.

R2 from stage 3 model

Year

Region

R2 Pred2

R2 PM25

2003

1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3

0.83 0.86 0.61 0.83 0.84 0.64 0.83 0.84 0.65 0.86 0.87 0.59 0.83 0.84
0.62 0.83 0.82 0.65 0.81 0.80 0.61 0.75 0.81 0.60 0.85 0.81 0.61 0.82
0.83 0.62

0.90 0.91 0.85 0.88 0.90 0.85 0.91 0.90 0.87 0.89 0.91 0.86 0.90 0.91
0.88 0.87 0.88 0.90 0.86 0.86 0.83 0.83 0.89 0.85 0.89 0.88 0.87 0.88
0.89 0.86

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Mean

Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2015), 1 --
8

PM2.5 prediction using 1- km satellite data Lee et al

6

Figure 3.

Predicted PM2.5 level in 2003.

Figure 4.

Residual map.

Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2015), 1 --
8

© 2015 Nature America, Inc.

PM2.5 prediction using 1- km satellite data Lee et al

performance with an average cross-validated R2 of 0.70 (minimum of 0.63
occurred in 2011 and maximum of 0.75 occurred in 2003 and 2005). For
region 1, an average cross-validated R2 was 0.77 and ranged from 0.65 in
2010 to 0.83 in 2005. The slopes between the observed PM2.5 versus the
modeled PM2.5 were close to 1 for all the regions, suggesting a good
agreement between the model results and actual measurements and the thus
low bias. Region 2 exhibited the lowest average RMSPE of 2.51 μg/m3,
followed by region 3 with 2.82 μg/m3 and region 1 with 2.87 μg/m3. The
RMSPE for the spatial component was much lower at 0.82 μg/m3 in region
2. In general, the models performed better temporally than spatially.
The temporal R2 values were higher than the spatial ones except for
region 3. For the temporal result, the mean R2 was 0.80, 0.82, and 0.69
for regions 1, 2, and 3, respectively. For the spatial model the mean R2
was 0.69, 0.63, and 0.76 by region order. The output prediction model
based on the third model gave very similar results (Table 3). The third
column represents the R2 for the prediction from stage 2 (prediction for
the gird cells and days that AOD readings were available) and the last
column illustrates those for the comparison with actual PM2.5
observations. The ﬁnal prediction showed high predictive power, from
0.89 (region 2) to 0.86 (region 3). To graphically represent the
predictions, Figure 3 displays the prediction results in the form of
annual average in 2003 where reveals higher PM2.5 levels for highways
and the main cities. The spatial pattern of predictions matches well
with the one of the

Table 4.

7 measured PM2.5 represented in Figure 2. There was no systematic
spatial patterns of residuals during the study period (Figure 4).
Compared with the existing AOD data at a 10 × 10 -km resolution, the
MAIAC data at a 1 × 1- km resolution showed the better performance
(Table 4). Only except for slight decrease in the mean of 10-fold
cross-validated R2 for Region 1 from 0.78 to 0.77, the MAIAC data showed
the higher R2 values. Especially, the performance in Region 3
drastically improved from 0.62 to 0.70. The new data also had lower
errors than the existing one. RMSPE values have decreased from 3.27 to
2.89 μg/m3 for Region 1, from 2.90 to 2.51 μg/m3 for Region 2, and from
3.64 to 2.82 μg/m3 for Region 3. Other indicators such as Spatial R2 and
temporal R2 have also improved when using the 1- km AOD data. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we predicted PM2.5 levels across the Southeastern US at a
1-km resolution using the MODIS satellite imagery derived by the newly
developed algorithm MAIAC. Compared to the AOD data at a 10- km
resolution, the MAIAC data at a 1-km resolution showed the better
performance. Furthermore, higher resolution enabled the more precise
exposure assessment for PM2.5 at a ﬁner scale such as the street-level
address. These results will enable epidemiological studies to evaluate
the association between PM2.5 and its health effects with reduced
measurement error in exposure. We also anticipate study areas may extend
to rural areas in the Southeastern US, which were formerly restricted to
urban areas because of the distance to

Result of site-based 10-fold cross-validation from stage 1 model using
10-km2 data

Year

Region

R2 (CV)

Slope (CV)

RMSPE (μg/m3)

Spatial R2

Temporal R2

Spatial RMSPE

2000 2000 2000 2001 2001 2001 2002 2002 2002 2003 2003 2003 2004 2004
2004 2005 2005 2005 2006 2006 2006 2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2009
2009 2009 2010 2010 2010

1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3

0.84 0.80 0.72 0.78 0.79 0.65 0.79 0.77 0.63 0.77 0.84 0.60 0.75 0.78
0.69 0.82 0.81 0.68 0.79 0.82 0.62 0.77 0.82 0.59 0.77 0.77 0.58 0.77
0.75 0.49 0.70 0.75 0.55 0.78 0.79 0.62

0.99 0.98 1.00 0.98 0.99 0.98 0.97 0.99 0.96 0.99 0.99 0.96 0.97 0.99
0.97 0.98 0.99 0.99 1.00 0.99 0.97 0.97 0.99 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.96 0.99
0.99 1.00 0.99 1.00 0.99 0.98 0.99 0.98

3.76 3.40 4.09 3.68 3.18 3.74 3.60 3.14 3.72 3.30 2.79 3.56 3.30 3.15
3.60 3.59 3.20 3.90 3.36 3.03 3.45 3.71 2.88 4.31 2.79 2.60 3.36 2.33
2.15 3.25 2.57 2.38 3.02 3.27 2.90 3.64

0.64 0.54 0.64 0.43 0.52 0.57 0.62 0.36 0.58 0.25 0.30 0.52 0.36 0.47
0.63 0.38 0.58 0.62 0.60 0.46 0.55 0.64 0.66 0.57 0.46 0.61 0.59 0.63
0.78 0.64 0.20 0.53 0.68 0.47 0.53 0.60

0.85 0.82 0.74 0.80 0.80 0.69 0.80 0.79 0.63 0.79 0.86 0.61 0.77 0.79
0.71 0.84 0.83 0.71 0.80 0.83 0.64 0.78 0.83 0.59 0.79 0.78 0.57 0.78
0.77 0.48 0.73 0.76 0.54 0.79 0.81 0.63

1.09 1.42 1.73 1.55 1.14 1.59 1.15 1.14 1.40 1.29 1.03 1.54 1.25 0.93
1.40 1.33 1.06 1.69 1.13 1.08 1.60 1.22 0.73 1.67 0.99 0.86 1.42 0.80
0.76 1.34 0.96 0.77 1.38 1.16 0.99 1.52

Mean

© 2015 Nature America, Inc.

Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2015), 1 --
8

PM2.5 prediction using 1- km satellite data Lee et al

8 monitoring stations. Considering that PM2.5 measurements are not
always daily, our model interpolates the temporal break using the daily
satellite imagery and a smoothing technique as well as spatial
predictions. This approach enables epidemiological studies to examine
both acute and chronic effects. Model performance varied by region.
Region 2 mainly covering North Carolina revealed the highest performance
(0.81) and region 3, covering the most southern part, such as Florida,
had the lowest performance (0.70). One possible explanation is that the
spatial density of monitoring stations affects model. Region 2 has the
most abundant monitoring stations compared with its area, whereas region
3 lacks monitoring stations for its extensive area. This appeared to
affect the results by providing fewer pairs to ﬁt the model. Another
explanation may be that region 2 is relatively more urbanized compared
with region 3 with more land-use factors which could be taken into
account. This suggestion parallels with our experience during the
analysis that the calibration model based on the highest R2 for region 2
has more land-use variables than that for region 3. Lastly, the quality
of AOD from the MODIS instrument and the MAIAC algorithm should be
considered. Visual analysis (data not present) by AOD swath revealed
that the performance of AOD differed by tile of satellite imagery. Tile
h01v02 that covers North Carolina showed the best performance, whereas
tiles around Alabama (h00v03 and h01v03) showed the poorest performance.
To improve model performance, other AOD products from other algorithms
such as AOD data from Deep Blue algorithm18 at 10-km resolution can be
incorporated which is used for bright surfaces. More studies are needed
to determine which factors play a role in the prediction of PM2.5 using
satellite imagery and to further improve the performance. Compared with
the existing studies on the similar area,19--21 our study shows higher
R2 and less errors. After predicting PM2.5 levels at a 10-km resolution
for the similar area for the year 2003,21 Hu et al.19 examined the
feasibility of the 1- km resolution MAIAC AOD data by comparing with the
10-km data. In their study, the performance of the MAIAC AOD data was
comparable with the existing MODIS data but showed slightly lower
performance. Our study demonstrated the MAIAC AOD can outperform the
existing 10-km data by using various approaches on the top of the
advantage of the higher resolution. The study resulted in an R2 of 0.64
and RMSPE of 3.93 μg/m3 for the MAIAC data in stage 1. In our model, the
lowest R2 in 2003 was 0.72 with a RMSPE 3.51 μg/m3. Recently, they
expanded their study period for the same area20 from a single year of
2003 to the multiple years from 2001 to 2010. Our study area covers vast
additional areas in the Southeastern US by adding Florida, Mississippi,
and the complete parts of other states. Adopting different approaches
than their study, our study shows higher R2 values and lower RMSPE. The
total mean of 10-fold cross-validated R2 was 0.76 compared with the
existing study 0.72 and that of RMSPE from our study was 2.74 compared
with 3.72 μg/m3. Considering that our study area includes the most
southern area such as Florida which showed the lowest performance with a
big difference and we applied sitebased cross-validation rather than
observation-based crossvalidation which produces higher R2, the actual
improvement is expected to be bigger. In conclusion, we have
demonstrated that the use of satellite imagery and other land-use
variables with a mixed-effect model produces reliable predictions of
daily PM2.5 for the large area of the Southeastern United States. By
incorporating land-use terms and spatial smoothing, our models perform
much better than previous studies. Therefore, our model results can be
used in various epidemiological studies investigating the effects of
PM2.5 allowing one to assess both acute and chronic exposures with the
implication of a new application. Our model results will extend the
existing studies on PM2.5 mainly targeted only for urban areas tied
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2015), 1 --
8

to the lack of monitors into new areas which used not to be studied such
as rural areas. CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no conﬂict of
interest.

REFERENCES 1 Dockery DW, Pope CA, Xu X, Spengler JD, Ware JH, Fay ME et
al. An association between air pollution and mortality in six U.S.
cities. N Engl J Med 1993; 329: 1753--1759. 2 Pope CA 3rd. Epidemiology
of ﬁne particulate air pollution and human health: biologic mechanisms
and who's at risk? Environ Health Perspect 2000; 108: 713--723. 3 Pope
CA 3rd, Burnett RT, Thun MJ, Calle EE, Krewski D, Ito K et al. Lung
cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term exposure to ﬁne
particulate air pollution. JAMA 2002; 287: 1132--1141. 4 Barnett AG,
Williams GM, Schwartz J, Best TL, Neller AH, Petroeschevsky AL et al.
The effects of air pollution on hospitalizations for cardiovascular
disease in elderly people in Australian and New Zealand cities. Environ
Health Perspect 2006; 114: 1018--1023. 5 Rhomberg LR, Chandalia JK, Long
CM, Goodman JE. Measurement error in environmental epidemiology and the
shape of exposure-response curves. Crit Rev Toxicol 2011; 41: 651--671.
6 Armstrong BG. Effect of measurement error on epidemiological studies
of environmental and occupational exposures. Occup Environ Med 1998; 55:
651--656. 7 Goldman GT, Mulholland JA, Russell AG, Strickland MJ, Klein
M, Waller LA et al. Impact of exposure measurement error in air
pollution epidemiology: effect of error type in time-series studies.
Environ Health 2011; 10: 61. 8 Ryan PH, LeMasters GK. A review of
land-use regression models for characterizing intraurban air pollution
exposure. Inhal Toxicol 2007; 19: 127--133. 9 de Hoogh K, Wang M, Adam
M, Badaloni C, Beelen R, Birk M et al. Development of land use
regression models for particle composition in twenty study areas in
Europe. Environ Sci Technol 2013; 47: 5778--5786. 10 Beckerman BS,
Jerrett M, Martin RV, van Donkelaar A, Ross Z, Burnett RT. Application
of the deletion/substitution/addition algorithm to selecting land use
regression models for interpolating air pollution measurements in
California. Atmos Environ 2013; 77: 172--177. 11 Wang R, Henderson SB,
Sbihi H, Allen RW, Brauer M. Temporal stability of land use regression
models for trafﬁc-related air pollution. Atmos Environ 2013; 64:
312--319. 12 Whitworth KW, Symanski E, Lai D, Coker AL. Kriged and
modeled ambient air levels of benzene in an urban environment: an
exposure assessment study. Environ Health 2011; 10: 21. 13 Kloog I,
Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J. Assessing temporally and
spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological studies using
satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos Environ 2011; 45:
6267--6275. 14 Alston EJ, Sokolik IN, Kalashnikova OV. Characterization
of atmospheric aerosol in the US Southeast from ground- and space-based
measurements over the past decade. Atmos Meas Tech 2012; 5: 1667--1682.
15 Lyapustin A, Wang Y, Laszlo I, Kahn R, Korkin S, Remer R et al.
Multiangle implementation of atmospheric correction (MAIAC): 2. Aerosol
algorithm. J Geophys Res 2011; 116: D03211. 16 Lee HJ, Liu Y, Coull BA,
Schwartz J, Koutrakis P. A novel calibration approach of MODIS AOD data
to predict PM$_2.5$ concentrations. Atmos Chem Phys 2011; 11:
7991--8002. 17 Jin S, Yang L, Danielson P, Homer C, Fry J, Xian G. A
comprehensive change detection method for updating the National Land
Cover Database to circa 2011. Remote Sens Environ 2013; 132: 159--175.
18 Li X, Xia X, Wang S, Mao J, Liu Y. Validation of MODIS and deep blue
aerosol optical depth retrievals in an arid/semi-arid region of
northwest China. Particuology 2012; 10: 132--139. 19 Hu X, Waller LA,
Lyapustin A, Wang Y, Al-Hamdan MZ, Crosson WL et al. Estimating
ground-level PM2.5 concentrations in the Southeastern United States
using MAIAC AOD retrievals and a two-stage model. Remote Sens Environ
2014; 140: 220--232. 20 Hu X, Waller LA, Lyapustin A, Wang Y, Liu Y.
10-year spatial and temporal trends of PM$_2.5$ concentrations in the
southeastern US estimated using high-resolution satellite data. Atmos
Chem Phys 2014; 14: 6301--6314. 21 Hu X, Waller LA, Al-Hamdan MZ,
Crosson WL, Estes MG Jr, Estes SM et al. Estimating ground-level PM2.5
concentrations in the southeastern U.S. using geographically weighted
regression. Environ Res 2013; 121: 1--10.

© 2015 Nature America, Inc.


