ehp

http://www.ehponline.org

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PERSPECTIVES

Prenatal Air Pollution Exposure and Newborn Blood Pressure Lenie van
Rossem, Sheryl L. Rifas-Shiman, Steven J. Melly, Itai Kloog, Heike
Luttmann-Gibson, Antonella Zanobetti, Brent A. Coull, Joel D. Schwartz,
Murray A. Mittleman, Emily Oken, Matthew W. Gillman, Petros Koutrakis,
and Diane R. Gold http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307419 Received: 25
July 2013 Accepted: 26 January 2015 Advance Publication: 27 January 2015

This article will be available in its final, 508-conformant form 2--4
months after Advance Publication. If you require assistance accessing
this article before then, please contact Dorothy L. Ritter, EHP Web
Editor. EHP will provide an accessible version within 3 working days of
request.

Prenatal Air Pollution Exposure and Newborn Blood Pressure Lenie van
Rossem,1,2 Sheryl L. Rifas-Shiman,3 Steven J. Melly,1 Itai Kloog,1,4
Heike LuttmannGibson,1 Antonella Zanobetti,1 Brent A. Coull,5 Joel D.
Schwartz,1,6 Murray A. Mittleman,1,7 Emily Oken,3 Matthew W. Gillman,3,8
Petros Koutrakis,1 and Diane R. Gold1,6

1

Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts,

USA; 2Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 3Obesity Prevention
Program, Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School and
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 4The
Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; 5Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA; 6Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital; and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;
7Cardiovascular Epidemiology Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA; 8Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Address correspondence to Lenie van Rossem, Harvard School of Public
Health, Department of Epidemiology, Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk
(EER) Program, 401 Park Drive West, PO Box 15677, Boston, MA 02215 USA.
Telephone: (617) 384-8823. E-mail: l.vanrossem@umcutrecht.nl Running
title: Air pollution and newborn BP 1

 

Acknowledgments: We thank all the participants and staff of Project
Viva. This study was funded by the US Environmental Protection Agency
(RD83479801) and the National Institutes of Health (K24 HD069408; R37 HD
034568, P01 ES009825). Competing financial interests: No competing
financial interests

2

 

Abstract Background: Air pollution exposure has been associated with
increased blood pressure in adults. Objective: We examined associations
of antenatal exposure to ambient air pollution with newborn systolic
blood pressure (SBP). Methods: We studied 1,131 mother-infant pairs in a
Boston-area pre-birth cohort. We calculated average exposures by
trimester and during the 2 to 90 days before birth for
temporally-resolved particulate matter (PM)2.5, black carbon (BC), NOx,
NO2, O3 and carbon monoxide (CO) measured at stationary monitoring
sites, and for spatiotemporally-resolved estimates of PM2.5 and BC at
the residence level. We measured SBP at a mean age of 30±18 hours with
an automated device. We used mixed effects models to examine
associations between air pollutant exposures and SBP, taking into
account measurement circumstances; child's birth weight; mother's age,
race/ethnicity, socio-economic position, 3rd trimester BP; and time
trend. Estimates\\
   represent\\
   differences  in\\
  SBP\\
  associated\\
  with\\
  an\\
  interquartile  (IQR)  increase\\
  in\\
  each\\
  pollutant. Results: Higher mean PM2.5 and BC exposures during the
third trimester were associated with higher SBP (e.g., 1.0 mmHg; 95% CI:
0.1, 1.8 for a 0.32-µg/m3 increase in mean 90-day residential BC). In
contrast, O3 was negatively associated with SBP (e.g., -2.3 mmHg; 95%
CI: 4.4, -0.2 for a 13.5 ppb increase during the 90 days before birth).
Conclusions: Exposures to PM2.5 and BC in late pregnancy were positively
associated with newborn SBP, while O3 was negatively associated with
SBP. Longitudinal follow-up will enable us to assess the implications of
these findings for health during later childhood and adulthood.

3

 

Introduction During the prenatal period, a critical period for
cardiovascular growth and development, fetuses may be especially
vulnerable to adverse health effects of ambient air pollution (Selevan
et al. 2000). Earlier studies have reported associations of greater
prenatal exposure to air pollution to low birth weight, preterm
birth,(Bonzini et al. 2010; Bosetti et al. 2010; Ghosh et al. 2007;
Glinianaia et al. 2004; Maisonet et al. 2004; Shah and Balkhair 2011;
Sram et al. 2005; Stillerman et al. 2008) and higher maternal blood
pressure (BP) in pregnancy (van den Hooven et al. 2011). Effects of
prenatal air pollution on neonatal BP has not been explored previously,
but there is evidence that infant BP is influenced by prenatal maternal
conditions including hypertension, maternal drug use (Kent et al 2009),
and by infant's weight, gestational age, and postnatal age (Gillman et
al. 2004; Huxley et al. 2000; Kent et al. 2009; Morrison et al. 2013;
Simonetti et al. 2011). In adults, air pollution has been positively
associated with BP (as reviewed in Brook 2005), although inverse
associations between BP and the pollutants PM and NOx have also been
reported (Hampel et al. 2011, Sorensen et al. 2012). Some studies have
reported an association between air pollution and higher blood pressure
in healthy children (Sughis et al. 2012, Bilenko et al. 2013). Despite
the abundant research interest in the early origins of vascular
dysfunction, we know of no published study that has assessed the
association between prenatal exposure to ambient air pollution and
offspring BP. This study investigates associations of prenatal exposures
to air pollution (PM2.5, black carbon (BC), NOx, NO2, O3, and CO) with
blood pressure in newborns. Although prior studies have generally used
particulate matter (PM) as a proxy for air pollution exposure (Brook and
Rajagopalan, 2009), we also considered BC, which is a traffic-related
component of PM that has 4

 

been associated with blood pressure in adults (Mordukhovich et al.
2009). We hypothesized that PM2.5, BC, NOx or NO2 exposure during
pregnancy would be associated with higher newborn BP. We had no prior
hypothesis regarding the direction of the association between O3 and
newborn BP, given the conflicting results reported in adults, including
the findings from our research group of lower BP with increased O3 among
adults with diabetes in Boston (Hoffmann et al. 2012). The latter shows
that the direction of the association may be different in vulnerable
subgroups, such as newborns. In addition, while ambient monitors have
been used in prior cohort studies to examine effects of pollution
exposure, more emphasis is now shifting to spatiotemporal models that
capture geographic variations in exposure within a metropolitan area. We
have incorporated this for PM2.5 and BC.

Methods Study design and participants Study subjects were participants
in Project Viva, a prospective pre-birth observational cohort study of
the influences of antenatal and perinatal factors on maternal and child
health. We recruited women who were attending their initial prenatal
visit at one of 8 urban and suburban obstetrical offices of Harvard
Vanguard Medical Associations, a multi-specialty group practice located
in eastern Massachusetts, between April 1999 and July 2002. Details of
recruitment and retention procedures are available elsewhere (Gillman et
al. 2004). The human subjects committees of participating institutes
approved the study protocols and all mothers provided written informed
consent. All procedures were in accordance with the ethical standards
for human experimentation established by the Declaration of Helsinki.

5

 

The cohort started with 2,128 live births. We performed in-person
visits during the inpatient hospital stay with mothers only on weekdays
(n=1,714, 81%), and we measured BP of their newborn (n=1,131, 66%).
Reasons for not obtaining a BP measurement were parents not giving
consent for measurements (n=328), infant not available when staff was
present (n=104), infant transferred to neonatal intensive care unit
(n=78), measurements could not be performed (infant too fussy)(n=32),
and other reasons (n=41). Measurements Participant characteristics
Maternal age (years) was ascertained at enrollment. Maternal third
trimester BP (mmHg) obtained from the medical record was calculated as
the average BP between 28 and 32 weeks of gestation. Maternal
pre-pregnancy weight and height (which we used to calculate BMI) and
serial urine and blood pressure measurements (which we used to identify
gestational hypertension or pre-eclampsia), were derived from the
medical record. Mother's self-reported race/ethnicity was categorized as
Black, Hispanic, White or other. Maternal smoking and physical activity
were also self-reported. We obtained birth weight (kg) and date of birth
from the hospital record. We included socio-economic status on an
individual level estimated by maternal education at enrollment (college
graduate vs. less) and at the neighborhood level as median household
income derived from the Census 2000. Outcome We measured newborn BP with
a Dinamap (Critikon, Inc) Pro 100 (or, before February 21, 2001, model
8100) automated oscillometric recorder (GE Medical Services, Tampa, FL)
according to a standardized protocol. For each of 5 measurements taken 1
minute apart, we also 6

 

recorded conditions during the measurement: infant position (in
bassinet or held), extremity used (left or right arm), cuff size, and
infant state (quiet sleep, active sleep, quiet awake, crying). We
obtained 5 readings on 1,092 infants, 4 readings on 15 infants, 3
readings on 7 infants, 2 readings on 7 infants, and 1 reading on 10
infants, for a total of 5,565 readings on the 1,131 participants. We
used systolic BP rather than diastolic BP as our primary outcome,
because of the validity of its measurement with the oscillometric
device, and superior prediction of long-term BP (Gillman and Cook 1995).
Temporally-resolved exposure measures Ambient concentrations of fine
particle mass (with aerodynamic diameter less than 2.5 µm, PM2.5) and
black carbon (BC), were measured hourly at a central monitoring site
(Harvard Supersite) in Boston, MA. We measured PM2.5 concentrations with
a Tapered Element Oscillation Microbalance (Model 1400A, Rupprecht and
Pastashnick, East Greenbush, NY), and BC concentrations using an
Aethalometer (Magee Scientific Co., Model AE-16, Berkeley, CA). Air
sampling, processing of samples, analysis, and reporting were conducted
according to standard operating procedures (Kang et al. 2010). We
calculated hourly ambient concentrations of the sum of nitrogen oxides
(NOx= NO2+NO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2) ozone (O3), and carbon monoxide
(CO) by averaging data from the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection's Greater Boston monitoring sites (N=4 for CO
and O3; N=5 for NO2 and NOx); thus these estimates represent a city wide
exposure. Most of the nitrogen oxides emitted by traffic are in the form
of NO; however, part of NO is oxidized to NO2 by O3. Therefore, we
consider NOx as a more robust metric of nitrogen oxide exposures related
to traffic, though NO2 is more often used as a marker in air pollution
studies. Weather data were collected from the National Weather 7

 

Service Station at Logan Airport (East Boston, MA). Missing hourly data
for PM2.5 and BC (but not other pollution or weather parameters) were
imputed. This imputation procedure used long term trend; seasonality
(sine and cosine terms); season (1=May-Sept, 0=otherwise); hour of the
day; day of the week; weather (barometric pressure, relative humidity,
mean temperature, horizontal visibility, wind direction, and wind
speed); gasses: CO, NO2, SO2; ozone during summer months; and
interactions with season, wind, and hour of the day. In total, 2% of the
24hour PM2.5 and BC estimates were imputed. All the pollutants were
first summarized in 24-hour (9am-9am) intervals. For calculating the
trimester specific exposures, we calculated gestational age at birth
from the last menstrual period or from the second trimester ultrasound
if the two estimates differed by >10 days (N=200, 9%). Trimester 1 ended
at last menstrual period + 93 days, trimester 2 at last menstrual period
+ 187 days and trimester 3 at the day before birth. We also calculated
different time windows of exposure to air pollution (“moving averages”)
from 2 to 7, 14, 30, 60, and 90-days before birth for a more specific
evaluation of air pollution exposures close to the time of birth. The
moving averages excluded the day of the blood pressure measurement. For
each central site exposure period of interest, for each participant, we
required that participants live within 40 km of the Harvard Supersite
and that exposure data be available for at least 75% of the time in the
specific averaging period; otherwise, the exposure was set to missing.
Spatially- and temporally-resolved estimated PM2.5 and BC exposures
Mothers reported their home address at enrollment and updated it at each
subsequent study visit, including at birth. We geocoded addresses using
ESRI ArcGIS© software StreetMap data.

8

 

Estimated spatially- and temporally-resolved PM2.5 exposure data were
generated by previously described PM2.5 prediction models validated for
the New England region (Kloog et al. 2012). In brief, we used mixed
effects models with random slopes and intercepts for day to calibrate
satellite Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) data at a resolution of a 10x10 km
spatial grid (2000-- 2008) with monitored ground PM2.5 measurements. We
then used a generalized additive mixed model with spatial smoothing to
estimate PM2.5 in location-day pairs with missing AOD satellite data
(due to snow, clouds, etc.), using regional measured PM2.5, AOD values
in neighboring cells, and land use variables. ”Out-of-sample” ten-fold
cross-validation was used to quantify the accuracy of our predictions.
That is, 10% of the days were held out of the analysis that generated
the prediction, and the accuracy tested against those held out
measurements. This was repeated 10 times. For days with available AOD
data we found high “out-of-sample” R2 (mean “out-ofsample” R2=0.87). For
days without AOD values, our model performance was also excellent (mean
“out-of-sample” R2=0.85). A regression of the held out data against the
predicted had a slope of 1, indicating no bias. To estimate daily
spatially and temporally-resolved PM2.5 exposure, each residence (for
the period when the participant lived there) was linked to the 10x10 km
grid in which it was located. Exposure by trimester and for each
averaging period was calculated by averaging daily PM2.5 concentrations
as described above. Because PM2.5 was modeled for 2000-2008, data were
missing for newborns born between April-December 1999. We predicted
individual-level estimates of residential BC concentrations from a
validated spatiotemporal land-use regression model. Details of the model
and its validation have been published earlier (Gryparis et al. 2007;
Zanobetti et al 2013). In short, daily concentrations at the Boston
central-site monitor were used as a predictor to reflect average
concentration levels for a given day, serving as a direct estimate of
the daily time effect. Out-of-sample cross-validation at 9

 

32 monitoring sites showed an average correlation of 0.73 between
predicted and observed daily BC levels. Data from 148 other stationary
air monitors were used to fit the model and estimate the effect of each
covariate in the land-use regression model. Covariates in the BC
prediction model included measures of land use for each address
(cumulative traffic density within 100 m, population density, per cent
urbanization), location (latitude and longitude), daily meteorological
factors (apparent temperature, wind speed and height of the planetary
boundary layer) and temporal factors (day of week and day of season).
Separate models were fit for the warm and cold season. Interaction terms
between the temporal meteorological predictors and land-use variables
allowed for space--time interactions. Regression splines allowed main
effect terms to non-linearly predict exposure levels, and thin-plate
splines modeled the residual spatial variability additional spatial
variability unaccounted for by the spatial predictors. Daily BC
predictions outside of the observed range of the monitored exposure
measurements were excluded. To assess the validity of the model, we
checked different specifications of the hyperparameters. The results
were reasonably robust to even large changes in the specification of the
hyperparameters. Statistical analyses To assess associations between air
pollutants and newborn systolic BP, we used mixed effects models that
incorporated each of the up to 5 BP measurements from each infant as
repeated outcome measures (Laird and Ware 1982). Some advantages of this
modeling approach, compared with using the average of available measures
for each child as the outcome, are that persons with more measurements
and less variability among those measurements receive more weight than
those with fewer measurements and/or more variability (Fitzmaurice
2011). 10

 

We modeled each environmental exposure separately. In all multivariable
models, we adjusted for order of measurement and infant state during the
measurement. We also adjusted for maternal age, maternal third trimester
BP, infant's postnatal age (in hours) and birth weight, because these
variables were predictive of newborn BP in an earlier report (Gillman et
al. 2004). We adjusted for mother's race/ethnicity (categorical: black,
Hispanic, other, white), and for mother's educational level
(categorical: college degree vs. less), and median neighborhood income
(continuous) as indicators of socio-economic position. Using penalized
splines in R version 2.10.0 (R Development Core Team, 2009), the model
included a variable representing date to take into account seasonality
and time trend. Furthermore, we included outdoor temperature
(continuous) on the day of the blood pressure measurement. Other weather
conditions did not change the estimates of blood pressure (data not
shown), and were therefore not included in the model. We visually
checked continuous variables for departure from linearity with the
outcome with penalized splines, which was not the case for any variable
(data not shown). The estimates were scaled to the interquartile range
(25th to 75th percentile), and reported with their 95% confidence
intervals (CI). Each estimate gives the difference in BP in mmHg for
each interquartile increase in the pollutant. We performed a series of
sensitivity analyses. First, we considered multi-pollutant models, one
with PM2.5 and O3 together in the same model, and another with O3 and
NOx together. Second, mother's blood pressure, infant birth weight, and
gestational age could be mediators in the association between
trimester-specific exposure to air pollution and newborn blood pressure.
Therefore, we also ran a model excluding these potential intermediates.
Third, the association of air pollution with BP may differ according to
level of specific characteristics, because of differential vulnerability
of subgroups to the effect of air pollution on blood pressure.
Therefore, 11

 

using interaction terms, we evaluated gender (boy vs. girl),
socio-economic status (both on a neighborhood (median income on a
continuous scale) and individual level (college graduate vs. less)),
race/ethnicity (Black, Hispanic, other vs. White), gestational age
(weeks); and for O3 season as potential effect modifiers (warm season:
May-September, cold season: October-April). We considered effect
modification present if the p-value of the interaction term was <0.05.
Fourth, for the central monitor exposures we restricted the sample to
mothers that lived within 10 km of the Harvard Supersite. Fifth, we
restricted the models for the spatiotemporal variables to those children
who had information on the temporal variables. Sixth, we repeated the
analyses with diastolic BP. Last, we considered additional lifestyle and
maternal comorbidities (i.e. maternal physical activity, obesity,
parity, preeclampsia, hypertension, and cesarean section) as confounding
factors by adding these to the multivariable models and checking the
change in estimate for blood pressure. Statistical analyses were
performed using SAS (version 9.2; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) and
R version 2.10.0. A p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

Results Table 1 shows the characteristics of the mother-infant pairs in
the study, and Supplemental Material, Table S1 shows the association of
these characteristics with third trimester air pollution exposures. The
children included in this study were all born at 33-42 weeks, although
only 4% were born before 37 weeks of gestation. Mean blood pressure of
children born preterm (72.3 mmHg±9.7) and children born term (72.5
mmHg±8.9) was similar. Mean blood pressure varied according to infant's
state (quiet sleep: 70.5 mmHg±7.9; active sleep 72.1 mmHg±9.2; quiet
awake: 74.3 mmHg±9.3; active awake: 77.3 mmHg±10.3). Compared with the
997 mothers of 12

 

infants with no BP measurement at birth, the 1,131 participants
included in this analysis had higher educational level (67.0% versus
62.0% completed more than a college degree), had a higher proportion of
white (68.7% versus 64.0%), and their children had a higher birth weight
(3.52 versus 3.39 kg) and gestational age (39.7 versus 39.1 weeks).
Participants included in the study did not substantially differ with
respect to income, smoking status, maternal age or maternal third
trimester BP compared with those excluded (data not shown) or the whole
study population. A comparison of characteristics between the study
population and the analysis sample is presented in Supplemental
Material, Table S2. We present the distributions of air pollutant
concentrations for the 2-, 30-, and 90-day moving averages in
Supplemental Material, Table S3, and the correlation between 2- and
90-day moving averages in Supplemental Material, Tables S4 and S5.
Correlations were high for PM2.5, but more moderate for BC, especially
with increasing number of days averaged. Interquartile range was lower
in magnitude with higher number of days averaged. In multivariate
analyses, newborn SBP was 1.4 mmHg (95% CI: 0.3, 2.5) higher in
association with an IQR increase in temporally-resolved BC averaged over
the third trimester (Table 2). In contrast, SBP was 2.5 mmHg (95% CI:
-4.5, -0.4) lower in association with an IQR increase in third trimester
O3. Second trimester temporally-resolved PM2.5 and BC were not
associated with newborn SBP. Higher second trimester averaged
concentrations of the gaseous pollutants NOx, and CO were negatively
associated with changes in blood pressure. Higher second trimester
averaged concentration of the secondary geaseous pollutant O3 was
positively association with changes in SBP. 13

 

There were no statistical associations between exposure to any air
pollutant in the first trimester and newborn SBP. A key result of this
study is our finding of associations of neonatal BP with
spatio-temporally resolved as well as temporally resolved air pollution.
The association of SBP with spatiotemporally-resolved third trimester BC
was consistent with that for temporallyresolved BC (1.0 mmHg higher; 95%
CI: 0.2, 1.8) for an IQR increase. For PM2.5 both temporally and
spatio-temporally resolved exposures were not associated with SBP. For
BC and PM2.5, cumulative 2 to 90 day exposure was positively associated
with SBP, and suggested possible effects of short-term exposures, as
well as effects of more long-term exposures (Figure 1). Associations for
temporally resolved and spatio-temporally resolved BC and PM2.5 were
similar, although associations with spatio-temporally resolved PM2.5
seemed to decrease for longer term exposures. For the gases, the
predominant associations were related to long-term 30- to 90-day
averages (Figure 2), in particular for O3 and NOX, where O3 was
negatively associated with SBP and NOX was positively associated with
SBP. We performed a series of sensitivity analyses. First, we considered
two-pollutant models for 60day moving averages that included temporally
resolved BC and O3 or NOx and O3. The correlation between the 60-day
moving averages of BC and O3 was -0.17. In the multi-pollutant model the
associations for BC and O3 with newborn SBP were attenuated when
including them both in the model: BC from 1.2 mmHg (95% CI: 0.2, 2.1) to
0.7 mmHg (95% CI: -0.3, 1.6), and estimates for O3 attenuated from -3.3
mmHg (95% CI: -5.3, -1.3) to -2.8 mmHg (95% CI: -4.9, 0.8). The
correlation between the 60-day moving averages of NOx and O3 was -0.9.
In the multipollutant model the association for NOx with newborn SBP was
attenuated when including both NOx and O3 in the model: NOx from 2.1
mmHg (95% CI: 0.2, 3.9) to -0.7 mmHg (95% CI: -3.4, 14

 

2.1), but the estimate for O3 increased from -3.3 mmHg (95% CI: -5.3,
-1.3) to -3.9 mmHg (95% CI: -5.8, -1.9). In a two-pollutant model with
PM2.5 and O3, the estimates were fairly similar as the estimates of the
one pollutant model (data not shown). To assess the robustness of the
short term averages, we have also ran a 2-pollutant model including
short-term BC/PM2.5 and O3 ; estimates of BC, PM2.5 and O3 were fairly
similar as the estimates of the one pollutant model (data not shown).
Excluding mother's blood pressure and birth weight from the model did
not materially change the estimated associations, suggesting that these
factors did not mediate the relationship (data not shown). Effect
modification models resulted in interaction terms for child's gender,
socio-economic status, race/ethnicity, gestational age/preterm birth,
and season (tested for O3) that were mostly associated with p-values
>0.10 (data not shown), so we did not stratify the results.. Restricting
the sample to mothers who lived within 10 km (2776/5565 observations) of
the monitoring produced similar estimates, and restricting the
spatiotemporal models to participants who also had data for the temporal
models (5140/5565) did not change the estimates (data not shown). Last,
repeating the analyses with diastolic BP were similar in relative
magnitude and direction, but seemed weaker overall (Supplemental
Material, Table S6 and Figures S1 and S2). In general, adjusting for
maternal physical activity, obesity, parity, preeclampsia, hypertension,
and cesarean section did not substantially influence associations
between newborn SBP and air pollutants (data not shown).

15

 

Discussion In this study of prenatal air pollution and newborn BP, we
found that higher short-term and longer-term trimester-specific
concentrations of PM2.5 and BC were associated with higher newborn BP,
whereas higher concentrations of NO2, NOx, and O3 were associated with
lower and higher newborn BP (depending on the pregnancy period).
Associations were mainly seen in the 2nd and 3rd trimester, and for
PM2.5 and BC for both shorter, and in particular for BC, longerterm
cumulative exposure. For gaseous pollution, BP changes were associated
with longer-term exposures. Blood pressure is a function of cardiac
output and peripheral vascular resistance, each of which can be
influenced by a number of factors. Epidemiological and experimental
studies in adults suggest that underlying mechanisms for short-term air
pollution effects on increased blood pressure relate to autonomic
imbalance, and systemic oxidative/inflammatory responses promoting
vascular endothelial dysfunction (Brook 2005). A growing literature
supported by animal models suggests that longer term exposures to
particle pollution in adults can lead to atherosclerosis and vascular
remodeling (Pope et al. 2004; Sun et al. 2005; Soares et al. 2009).
These short and long term vascular responses could be applicable to the
fetus as well: at least one study has found adverse effects of antenatal
air pollution (PM2.5, CO, NO2, SO2) on placental vascular structure in a
rodent model (Veras et al. 2008). Adjustment for the potential mediators
such as maternal blood pressure or birth weight did not alter
associations, suggesting that air pollution may have influenced cardiac
output and structure directly through increasing placental vascular or
fetal vascular resistance and cardiac output. However, experimental
studies in

16

 

animals of air pollution in pregnancy and BP in offspring are lacking
and human interventions investigating this issue may be difficult to
perform. In an earlier study, we reported opposing associations of
particle pollutants and O3 with BP in an adult population with diabetes
after adjustment for season and ambient temperature (Hoffmann et al.
2012). We found that exposure to particle pollutants was associated with
higher BP, while exposure to O3 was associated with lower BP in the 3rd
trimester, but with higher BP in the 2nd trimester. In addition,
exposure to CO and NOx in the 2nd trimester was associated with lower
BP. An earlier study reported an inverse association between nitrogen
oxides and BP in adults (Sørensen et al 2012). Thus, particle pollutants
and gaseous pollutants may have different mechanisms underlying the air
pollution -- newborn BP association. A fall in cardiac output has been
shown in mice exposed to O3 (Lee and Pisarri 2001) but how this
phenomenon might work in utero is unknown. Alternatively, O3 was
strongly inversely correlated with NO2 (r90 days average= -0.69) and NOx
(r90 days average = -0.92) in our study, which is consistent with its
chemical properties: NOx is a primary vehicular pollutant that quenches
O3. In addition, ground-level O3 is higher with higher temperature and
low wind speed. While the association of O3 with lower BP may be
spurious due to its negative correlation with NOx and other pollutants
(Brook et al. 2009), the strong negative correlations make it difficult
to disentangle effects. In two-pollutant models, O3 was robust to
adjustment for BC and NO2, while the estimates for BC and NO2 were
attenuated. The consistent findings of short-term PM associations, and
short and longer-term (30-to-90 day and trimester-specific) BC
associations with BP suggest that these associations were not confounded
by season or other unmeasured exposures that season may represent. With
the 17

 

stationary-site measured gases, we only find long-term associations
with BP. Because of this, despite our adjustment with penalized splines
for season and for year-by-season trends, we cannot rule out the
possibility that whether the trimester-specific or 30-to-90 day average
gas (NOx or O3) associations with BP may be partly confounded by
unmeasured factors related to these 30 to 90 day periods. This is, of
course, a consideration in all studies that use trimesterspecific or 90
--day averaged temporally but not spatially-resolved pollution, as time
periods shorter than 365 days overlap with season. Future modeling of
spatio-temporally resolved NOx in our study will help us further
disentangle season from pollution associations. This study has many
strengths including careful measures of newborn BP and information on a
number of antenatal predictors and potential confounders. Nevertheless,
some limitations exist. The precision of exposure estimates may have
been reduced by using central site measures for many exposures of
interest. However, this was not reflected in the estimates as the third
trimester BC associations with BP were less strong for the
spatiotemporal estimates of BC than for the temporal measures of BC. It
is possible that regional BC may better reflect exposure than
residence-specific BC, because participants may not be at home during
the day. In contrast with BC, third trimester spatiotemporal PM2.5
estimates had larger, more precise associations with BP than did central
site measures of PM, even though the satellite-based estimates of PM2.5
was based on a 10 km, not a residence-specific spatial resolution. A
limitation of the present study is the spatial resolution of 10X10 km,
and the missings for the spatiotemporally estimates of PM2.5. However,
the missings are not likely to be associated with the exposure and/or
outcome variable and therefore probably only reduce precision. Although
we have adjusted for season, some seasonal components may still be mixed
with the effects of the 90-day and trimester-specific estimates of air
pollutant. Included and excluded participants differed according to
maternal race 18

 

and education. This could have led to selection bias if the association
between air pollution and blood pressure differed in those who were not
in the study. Although this is unlikely, we cannot completely rule out
the possibility. Finally, our study consisted of healthy neonates, and
therefore the results cannot be generalized to less healthy infants,
including children born preterm. Circulatory changes in the first hours
and days of life are profound; some of the cardiovascular measures at
birth may represent transient responses and others may have long-term
implications. Neonatal blood pressure may have a different meaning than
blood pressure measured later in infancy, childhood or adulthood. From
infancy onwards, children tend to maintain their blood pressure ranking,
meaning that infant with a relatively high blood pressure are more
likely to have a high blood pressure in adulthood(Chen and Wang 2008).
The literature on the implication of neonatal BP for later
cardiovascular disease or risk of hypertension is sparse (Levine et al.
1978; Schachter et al. 1979; de Swiet et al. 1980; Higgins et al. 1980;
Zinner et al. 1985). To our knowledge there is no follow-up study that
assessed the association between neonatal BP and later cardiovascular
health.

Conclusion Our study contributes unique insight into prenatal pollution
exposures and neonatal BP. In summary, we found that 3rd trimester
antenatal exposures to BC, and to a lesser extent PM2.5, were associated
with higher newborn BP , whereas concentrations of O3 in the 3rd
trimester were associated with lower BP. Future follow-up will indicate
whether these associations persist into later childhood.

19

 

References Bonzini M, Carugno M, Grillo P, Mensi C, Bertazzi PA,
Pesatori AC. 2010. Impact of ambient air pollution on birth outcomes:
systematic review of the current evidences. Med Lav 101:341--363.
Bilenko N, van Rossem L, Brunekreef B, Beelen R, Eeftens M, Hoek G,
Houthuijs D, de Jongste JC, Kempen EV, Koppelman GH, Meliefste K,
Oldenwening M, Smit HA, Wijga AH, Gehring U. 2013. Traffic-related air
pollution and noise and children's blood pressure: results from the
PIAMA birth cohort study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2013 Sep 18. [Epub ahead
of print] Bosetti C, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, Gallus S, Cipriani S, La Vecchia
C, Parazzini F. 2010. Ambient particulate matter and preterm birth or
birth weight: a review of the literature. Arch Toxicol 84:447--460.
Brook RD. 2005. You are what you breathe: evidence linking air pollution
and blood pressure. Curr Hypertens:427--434. Brook RD, Rajagopalan S.
2009. Particulate matter, air pollution, and blood pressure. J Am Sox
Hypertens 3:332--50. Brook RD, Urch B, Dvonch JT, Bard RL, Speck M,
Keeler G, et al. 2009. Insights into the mechanisms and mediators of the
effects of air pollution exposure on blood pressure and vascular
function in healthy humans. Hypertension 54:659--667. Chen X, Wang Y.
2008. Tracking of blood pressure from childhood to adulthood: a
systematic review and meta-regression analysis. Circulation
117:3171--3180. De Swiet M, Fayers P, Shinebourne EA. 1980. Systolic
blood pressure in a population of infants in the first year of life: the
Brompton study. Pediatrics 65:1028--1035. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, and
Ware JH. 2011. Linear Mixed Effect Models. In: Applied Longitudinal
Analysis. 2nd Ed. New York: Wiley & Sons. Ghosh R, Rankin J,
Pless-Mulloli T, Glinianaia S. 2007. Does the effect of air pollution on
pregnancy outcomes differ by gender? A systematic review. Environ Res
105:400--408. Gillman MW, Cook NR. 1995. Blood pressure measurement in
childhood epidemiological studies. Circulation 92:1049--1057. 20

 

Gillman MW, Rich-Edwards JW, Rifas-Shiman SL, Lieberman ES, Kleinman
KP, Lipshultz SE. 2004. Maternal age and other predictors of newborn
blood pressure. J Pediatr 144:240--245. Glinianaia SV, Rankin J, Bell R,
Pless-Mulloli T, Howel D. 2004. Particulate air pollution and fetal
health: a systematic review of the epidemiologic evidence. Epidemiology
15:36--45. Gryparis A, Coull BA, Schwartz J, Suh HH. 2007.
Semiparametric latent variable regression models for spatiotemporal
modelling of mobile source particles in the greater Boston area. J R
Stat Soc Ser C Appl Stat 56:183--209. Hampel R, Lepeule J, Schneider A,
Bottagisi S, Charles MA, Ducimetière P, Peters A, Slama R. 2011.
Short-term impact of ambient air pollution and air temperature on blood
pressure among pregnant women. Epidemiology 22(5):671--9. Higgins M,
Keller J, Moore F, Ostrander L, Metzner H, Stock L. 1980. Studies of
blood pressure in Tecumseh, Michigan. I. Blood pressure in young people
and its relationship to personal and familial characteristics and
complications of pregnancy in mothers. Am J Epidemiol 111:142--155.
Hoffmann B, Luttmann-Gibson H, Cohen A, Zanobetti A, de Souza C, Foley
C, et al. 2012. Opposing effects of particle pollution, ozone, and
ambient temperature on arterial blood pressure. Environ Health Perspect
120:241--246. Huxley RR, Shiell AW, Law CM. 2000. The role of size at
birth and postnatal catch-up growth in determining systolic blood
pressure: a systematic review of the literature. J Hypertens
18:815--831. Kang CM, Koutrakis P, Suh HH. 2010. Hourly measurements of
fine particulate sulfate and carbon aerosols at the Harvard-U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency Supersite in Boston. J Air Waste Manag
Assoc 60:1327--1334. Kent AL, Shadbolt B, Hu E, Meskell S, Falk MC,
Dahlstrom JE. 2009. Do maternal- or pregnancy-associated disease states
affect blood pressure in the early neonatal period? Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 49:264--70 Kloog I, Melly SJ, Ridgway WL, Coull BA, Schwartz J.
2012. Using new satellite based exposure methods to study the
association between pregnancy PM2.5 exposure, premature birth and birth
weight in Massachusetts. Environ Health 11:40.

21

 

Laird NM, Ware JH. 1982. Random-effects models for longitudinal data.
Biometrics 38:963-- 974. Lee LY, Pisarri TE. 2001. Afferent properties
and reflex functions of bronchopulmonary Cfibers. Respir Physiol
125:47--65. Levine RS, Hennekens CH, Klein B, Gourley J, Briese FW,
Hokanson J, et al. 1978. Tracking correlations of blood pressure levels
in infancy. Pediatrics 61:121--125. Maisonet M, Correa A, Misra D,
Jaakkola JJ. 2004. A review of the literature on the effects of ambient
air pollution on fetal growth. Environ Res 95:106--115. Mordukhovich I,
Wilker E, Suh H, Wright R, Sparrow D, Vokonas PS, et al. 2009. Black
carbon exposure, oxidative stress genes, and blood pressure in a
repeated-measures study. Environ Health Perspect 117:1767--1772.
Morrison KM, Anand SS, Yusuf S, Atkinson SA, Schulze KM, Rao-Melacini P,
McQueen MJ, McDonald S, Persadie R, Hunter B, Bourgeois J, Jansen JW,
Teo KK; FAMILY (Family Atherosclerosis Monitoring In earLY Life) Study
investigators. 2013. Maternal and pregnancy related predictors of
cardiometabolic traits in newborns. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55815. Pope CA,
3rd, Burnett RT, Thurston GD, Thun MJ, Calle EE, Krewski D, et al. 2004.
Cardiovascular mortality and long-term exposure to particulate air
pollution: epidemiological evidence of general pathophysiological
pathways of disease. Circulation 109:71--77. R Development Core Team
(2009). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN
3-900051-07-0, URL http://www.R-project.org Schachter J, Kuller LH,
Perkins JM, Radin ME. 1979. Infant blood pressure and heart rate:
relation to ethnic group (black or white), nutrition and electrolyte
intake. American journal of epidemiology 110:205--218. Selevan SG,
Kimmel CA, Mendola P. 2000. Identifying critical windows of exposure for
children's health. Environ Health Perspect 108 Suppl 3:451--455. Shah
PS, Balkhair T. 2011. Air pollution and birth outcomes: a systematic
review. Environ Int 37:498--516. 22

 

Simonetti GD, Schwertz R, Klett M, Hoffmann GF, Schaefer F, Wuhl E.
2011. Determinants of blood pressure in preschool children: the role of
parental smoking. Circulation 123:292--298. Soares SR, Carvalho-Oliveira
R, Ramos-Sanchez E, Catanozi S, da Silva LF, Mauad T, et al. 2009. Air
pollution and antibodies against modified lipoproteins are associated
with atherosclerosis and vascular remodeling in hyperlipemic mice.
Atherosclerosis 207:368-- 373. Sørensen M, Hoffmann B, Hvidberg M,
Ketzel M, Jensen SS, Andersen ZJ, Tjønneland A, Overvad K,
Raaschou-Nielsen O. 2012. Long-term exposure to traffic-related air
pollution associated with blood pressure and self-reported hypertension
in a Danish cohort. Environ Health Perspect 120(3):418--24. Sram RJ,
Binkova B, Dejmek J, Bobak M. 2005. Ambient air pollution and pregnancy
outcomes: a review of the literature. Environ Health Perspect
113:375--382. Stillerman KP, Mattison DR, Giudice LC, Woodruff TJ. 2008.
Environmental exposures and adverse pregnancy outcomes: a review of the
science. Reprod Sci 15:631--650. Sughis M, Nawrot TS, Ihsan-ul-Haque S,
Amjad A, Nemery B.2012. Blood pressure and particulate air pollution in
schoolchildren of Lahore, Pakistan. BMC Public Health 25;12:378. Sun Q,
Wang A, Jin X, Natanzon A, Duquaine D, Brook RD, et al. 2005. Long-term
air pollution exposure and acceleration of atherosclerosis and vascular
inflammation in an animal model. JAMA 294: 3003--3010. Van den Hooven
EH, de Kluizenaar Y, Pierik FH, Hofman A, van Ratingen SW, Zandveld PY,
et al. 2011. Air pollution, blood pressure, and the risk of hypertensive
complications during pregnancy: the generation R study. Hypertension
57:406--412. Veras MM, Damaceno-Rodrigues NR, Caldini EG, Maciel Ribeiro
AA, Mayhew TM, Saldiva PH, et al. 2008. Particulate urban air pollution
affects the functional morphology of mouse placenta. Biol Reprod
79:578--584. Zanobetti A, Coull BA, Gryparis A, Kloog I, Sparrow D,
Vokonas PS, Wright RO, Gold DR, Schwartz J. 2013. Associations between
arrhythmia episodes and temporally and spatially resolved black carbon
and particulate matter in elderly patients. Occup Environ Med. doi:
10.1136/oemed-2013-101526. [Epub ahead of print] 23

 

Zinner SH, Rosner B, Oh W, Kass EH. 1985. Significance of blood
pressure in infancy. Familial aggregation and predictive effect on later
blood pressure. Hypertension 7:411--416.

24

 

Table 1. Characteristics of 1,131 mother-infant pairs with neonatal
blood pressure measurements in Project Viva. Characteristics Maternal
characteristics Maternal age Maternal education College graduate
Mother's race/ethnicity Black Hispanic White Other Median income in
neighborhooda Maternal smoking during pregnancy Never Former Smoker
Maternal third trimester systolic blood pressure (mmHg)b Gestational age
(weeks) Preterm birth (<37 weeks) Yes No Child characteristics Birth
weight (kg) Birth weight for gestational age z -score Newborn blood
pressure (mmHg) Infant state at blood pressure measurement Quiet sleep
Active sleep Quiet awake Active awake a

N (%) or Mean ± SD 32.0 ± 5.3 752 (67.0) 193 (17.2) 70 (6.2) 771 (68.7)
89 (7.9) 58,604 ± 24,833 778 (69.2) 213 (19.0) 133 (11.8) 111.1 ± 8.1
39.7 ± 1.4 47 (4.2) 1084 (95.8) 3.52 ± 0.50 0.20 ± 0.95 72.5 ± 9.0 551
(48.7) 131 (11.6) 351 (31.8) 98 (8.7)

Census data for address at birth available for 1,125 families.
bAvailable for 1,126 mothers.

25

 

Table 2. Association between interquartile range of trimester specific
estimates of air pollution and systolic blood pressure (mmHg) in
newborns (single-pollutant model) Exposure Spatiotemporally resolved
PM2.5a N IQR (µg/m3) β (95% CI) Temporally resolved PM2.5 N IQR (µg/m3)
β (95% CI) Spatiotemporally resolved BCb N IQR (µg/m3) β (95% CI)
Temporally resolved BC N IQR (µg/m3) β (95% CI) NO2 N IQR (ppm) β (95%
CI) NOX N IQR (ppm) β (95% CI) O3 N IQR (ppm) β (95% CI) CO N IQR (ppb)
β (95% CI)

1st Trimester

2nd Trimester

3rd Trimester

765 2.29 --0.3 (--1.3, 0.7)

845 1.97 0.4 (--0.4, 1.2)

970 2.24 0.3 (--0.6, 1.2)

1,032 2.35 0.1 (--0.9, 1.2)

1,031 1.77 0.1 (--0.7, 1.0)

1,030 2.05 0.5 (--0.4, 1.5)

1,099 0.36 0.00 (-0.8, 0.8)

1,099 0.33 0.3 (-0.5, 1.0)

1,102 0.33 1.0 (0.2, 1.8)

1,032 0.15 -0.9 (-1.7, 0.0)

1,031 0.16 0.3 (-1.1, 1.6)

1,030 0.18 1.4 (0.3, 2.5)

1,032 2.63 0.3 (-0.8, 1.5)

1,031 2.96 -0.5 (-1.9, 0.8)

1,030 3.16 -0.5 (-1.8, 0.7)

1,032 16.7 0.3 (-0.8, 1.4)

1,031 17.8 -1.6 (-2.9, -0.2)

1,030 18.2 0.6 (-1.2, 2.5)

1,032 13.0 1.2 (-1.0, 3.5)

1,031 12.8 1.7 (0.3, 3.0)

1,030 13.6 -2.5 (-4.5, -0.4)

1,032 295.3 1.9 (-0.1, 3.9)

1,031 269.4 -2.4 (-3.8, -1.0)

1,030 218.1 0.1 (-1.5, 1.7)

Estimates are adjusted for neighborhood median income; mother's age,
third trimester blood pressure, educational level, and race/ethnicity;
child birth weight; infant's age at BP measurement, BP measurement
conditions; and time trend. a

PM = Particulate matter. bBC = Black carbon.

26

 

Figure Legends Figure 1. Association of spatiotemporally resolved PM2.5
exposure, temporally resolved PM2.5, spatiotemporally resolved BC; and
temporally resolved BC during different time windows before birth
("moving averages") with blood pressure in newborns. Estimates represent
mean difference in systolic blood pressure (95% confidence interval) for
an IQR in exposure and are adjusted for neighborhood median income;
mother's age, third trimester blood pressure, educational level, and
race/ethnicity; child birth weight; infant's age at BP measurement, BP
measurement conditions; and time trend. Figure 2. Association of NO2,
NOx, CO, and O3 exposure during different time windows before birth
("moving averages") with blood pressure in newborns. Estimates represent
mean difference in systolic blood pressure (95% confidence interval) for
an IQR in exposure and are adjusted for neighborhood median income;
mother's age, third trimester blood pressure, educational level, and
race/ethnicity; child birth weight; BP measurement conditions; and
seasonality.

27

 

Figure 1.

28

 

Figure 2.

29

 


