Medicine

Â®

OBSERVATIONAL STUDY

Air Pollution and Serum Glucose Levels A Population-Based Study Maayan
Yitshak Sade, MPH, Itai Kloog, PhD, Idit F. Liberty, MD, Itzhak Katra,
PhD, Lena Novack, PhD, and Victor Novack, MD, PhD

Abstract: Recent studies demonstrated an adverse effect of chronic
exposure to air pollution (AP) on metabolic syndrome and its components.
In a population-based study, we investigated the association between
exposure to ambient AP and serum glucose (SG), among subjects with
normal glucose, impaired fasting glucose (IFG), and diabetes mellitus
(DM). We included 1,063,887 SG tests performed in 131,882 subjects
(years 2001--2012). Exposure data included daily levels of SO2, NO2 and
other pollutants of industrial, traffic, and nonanthropogenic sources.
Demographical, clinical, and medications purchase data were assessed.
Log-transformed SG levels were analyzed by linear mixed models adjusted
for seasonal variables and personal characteristics. SG increases
(%increase [95% CI]), among subjects with normal glucose, IFG, and DM,
respectively, were associated with 6.36 ppb increase of NO2 measured 24
to 72 hours before the test (0.40% [0.31%; 0.50%], 0.56% [0.40%; 0.71%],
and 1.08% [0.86%; 1.29%]); and with 1.17 ppb increase of SO2 measured 24
hours before the test (0.29% [0.22%; 0.36%], 0.20% [0.10%; 0.31%], and
0.33% [0.14%; 0.52%]). Among DM population, weakest association was
observed among patients treated with Metformin (0.56% increase in SG
[0.18%; 0.95%]). In conclusion, NO2 and SO2 exposure is associated with
small but significantly increased levels of SG. Although DM patients
were found to be more susceptible to the AP induced SG variations,
Metformin treatment seem to have a protective effect. Given the chronic
lifetime exposure to AP and the broad coverage of the population, even
small associations such as those found in our study can be associated
with detrimental health effects and may have profound public health
implications. (Medicine 94(27):e1093) Abbreviations: ADA = American
Diabetes Association, AP = air pollution, CBS = central bureau of
statistics, CHS = Clalit Health Editor: Roman Leischik. Received: March
30, 2015; revised: June 3, 2015; accepted: June 5, 2015. From the
Clinical Research Center, Soroka University Medical Center, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'erSheva, Israel
(MYS, VN); Department of Geography and Environmental Development,
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Be'er-Sheva, Israel (IK, IK); Department of Internal Medicine,
Soroka University Medical Center, Be'er-Sheva, Israel (IFL); and
Department of Public Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, BenGurion
University of the Negev, Be'er-Sheva, Israel (LN) Correspondence: Victor
Novack, Soroka Clinical Research Center, Soroka University Medical
Center, Be'er-Sheva 84101, Israel (e-mail: victorno@clalit.org.il). This
research was supported by grant no. SGA 1303 from the Environment and
Health Fund, Israel. The authors have no funding and conflicts of
interest to disclose. Copyright # 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All
rights reserved. This is an open access article distributed under the
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0, which allows others
to remix, tweak, and build upon the work, even for commercial purposes,
as long as the author is credited and the new creations are licensed
under the identical terms. ISSN: 0025-7974 DOI:
10.1097/MD.0000000000001093

Medicine



Volume 94, Number 27, July 2015

Services, CI = confidence intervals, CV = coefficient of variance, DM =
diabetes mellitus, HbA1c = glycosylated hemoglobin, HMO = Health
Maintenance Organization, IFG = impaired fasting glucose, IQR =
interquartile range, PM10 = particular matter smaller than 10 mm in
diameter, PM2.5 = particular matter smaller than 2.5 mm in diameter, SES
= socioeconomic status, SG = serum glucose, SUMC = Soroka University
Medical Center.

INTRODUCTION

R

ecent studies demonstrated an adverse effect of long-term exposure to
air pollution (AP) on metabolic syndrome and its components, such as
diabetes mellitus (DM) and hypertension,1--3 adding risk to known
factors such as lifestyle, obesity, and inactivity.4 The data on the
effect of the specific pollutants on glucose homeostasis---a major
component of the metabolic syndrome--- are scarce. One study found
positive association of fasting serum glucose (SG) only with ozone, and
no other pollutants.5 Others found positive significant associations
between fasting SG levels, insulin resistance, and particular matter
smaller than 10 mm in diameter (PM10),6 particular matter smaller than
2.5 mm in diameter (PM2.5),7,8 sulfur dioxide (SO2),6 and nitrogen
dioxide (NO2).9-- 11 Studies suggested that the pathophysiology
explaining a possible association between AP and glucose levels is
linked to an inflammatory response which may disrupt the lipid and
glucose metabolism process.3,12,13 Current evidence is highly diverse in
terms of exposure assessment, outcome definitions, and the estimates of
association found. The association between AP exposure and glucose
homeostasis can be confounded by time factors,5 seasonality factors,5,7
and personal characteristics: age,3,5,7,14,15 gender,3,5,15
ethnicity,7,15 comorbidities,3 socioeconomic status (SES),3,5,15 and
other confounders.3 Trying to address the potential biases, we performed
a population-based analysis of over 1 million tests, collected over 12
years in Southern Israel (Negev). We aimed to explore the association
between AP (PM10, carbon monoxide (CO), SO2, NO2, and O3) and SG and
glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) variations, and to assess the potential
interactions by the presence of diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance
and type on antidiabetic treatment. This research was supported by grant
award No. SGA 1303 from the environment and health fund, Israel.

METHODS Study Population We included all fasting SG tests of Clalit
Health Services (CHS), Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) members,
performed in southern Israel between the years 2001 and 2012. Health
data were retrieved from CHS database. CHS is www.md-journal.com |

1

Medicine

Sade et al

the largest HMO in Israel; it insures approximately 70% of the Negev
population of 730,000 residents.16 All blood tests of CHS members in the
Negev are analyzed by a single laboratory. The demographic, clinical,
laboratory and medication prescription data of CHS members are fully
computerized and are available at the patient level. We obtained the
following patient data: age, gender, ethnicity, comorbidities,
medications, and SES. The latter was stratified into 3 levels: low,
intermediate, and high. SES was assigned based on the SES of the
population residing in the close proximity to the subjects' primary
clinic, according to the definitions of the central bureau of statistics
(CBS). Ethnicity was assigned for each city or settlement of residence
by the CBS and was determined according to the religion of the majority
of the population residing in it.17 We excluded children (under 18 years
of age), and those residing further than 20 km from the available
monitoring stations. The population excluded was similar to the subjects
represented in the study in terms of age, gender, and ethnicity
distribution.

Clinical Definitions We defined the patient DM or impaired fasting
glucose (IFG) status in accordance to the American Diabetes Association
(ADA) criteria.18 Diabetes diagnosis was established if one of the
following was present: documented physician confirmed diagnosis,
antidiabetic medication purchase, more than 1 measurement of fasting SG
equal or higher than 126 mg/dL or more than 1 measurement of HbA1c
6.5%. Patients were defined as having IFG if case of a record of more
than 1 fasting SG between 100 and 125 mg/dL, or more than 1 measurement
of HbA1c between 5.7% and 6.5%, or only 1 fasting SG level higher than
125 mg/dL, or only 1 HbA1c 6.5% in the presence of at least 1
additional fasting SG level between 100 and 125 mg/dL and at least 1
HbA1c level between 5.7% and 6.5%.18 On an event of multiple tests
available per a patient the most severe status of the disease was
assigned, that is, patients meeting DM criteria once during the study
period, were considered as such through the entire follow-up time. Tests
performed during hospitalizations were excluded from the analysis.

Air Pollution and Meteorological Data Daily data on air pollutants and
meteorological variables (air temperature and relative humidity) for the
period of 2001 to 2012 were obtained from the monitoring site located in
the center of the largest city (Beer-Sheva) in the Negev area. This
monitoring station is simultaneously recording data (every 5 minutes) of
the following pollutants: PM10, CO, SO2, NO2, and O3. Pollutants values
higher than the 98th percentile were defined as outliers and were
imputed with the value of the 98th percentile. Blood tests are performed
between 7:00 and 10:00 AM in all primary clinics in southern Israel.
Since the exact time of the test was not available, we used the
calculated averages of concentrations of the pollutants over 24 hours
(from 10:00 in the previous day to 10:00 AM in the day of the test) as
well as the temperature and relative humidity---24, 48, and 72 hours
before the day of the test.

Statistical Analysis Results are presented by mean  SD, interquartile
range (IQR) and range for continuous variables and as percentages for
categorical data.

2

www.md-journal.com



Volume 94, Number 27, July 2015

Coefficient of variation (CV) of SG was calculated for each subject. Low
and high variability of SG results were defined according to CV values
lower than the 10th percentile, and higher than the 90th percentile,
respectively. Analyses were performed separately among subjects with DM,
IFG, and normal glucose. Log-transformed SG levels were modeled by mixed
linear models, accounting for repeated tests within each subject. We
used multipollutant models, inclusive of 24, 48, or 72 hours averages of
pollutants. Models were adjusted for average value of temperature and
relative humidity, day of the week, year, age, gender, hypertension,
ethnicity, and SES. Models for DM patients were also adjusted for the
purchase of anti diabetic drugs during the 3 preceding months.
Coefficients were antilog transformed to the original units, and results
are presented as percent change in SG levels and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). In a subgroup analysis among the DM patients, we
stratified by the type of treatment: no medications, Insulin, Metformin,
or other antidiabetic drugs (GLP1 agonists, DPP4 inhibitor, alpha
glucosidase inhibitor, sulphonylurea, meglitinides, and
thiazolidinediones). The log-transformed HbA1c levels were modeled as
well. Since HbA1c levels represent the mean SG levels over approximately
3 months, exposure to pollutants was assigned as a 3 months moving
average of the pollutants concentrations.

Sensitivity Analysis SES data were available for 87% of the study
population. We performed sensitivity analyses to verify our results with
the imputation of median and maximal SES levels. Analyses were performed
in SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC) and R3.1.0 software. The
study has been approved by the institutional review board of Soroka
University Medical Center (SUMC).

RESULTS Population We identified 1,063,887 SG tests of 131,882 region
residents eligible for the study (Figure 1). DM patients (26,071
subjects) were 63 years old on average, 68% were treated with anti
diabetic drugs. Subjects (105,811 subjects) with no evidence of DM or
IFG were younger, and 2.22% (1961 subjects) were diagnosed with ischemic
heart disease and/or myocardial infarction (Table 1).

Meteorological and Pollution Data Table 2 shows summary statistics of AP
and meteorology data during the study period. Air pollutants IQR during
the study period were as follows: CO 0.19 ppm, NO2 6.36 ppb, SO2 1.17
ppb, O3 13.79 ppb, and PM10 26.44 mg/m3. The air temperatures are
relatively high most of the year. The IQR of the 24-hour mean air
temperature ranged between 14.4 and 24.9 8C reaching maximal mean air
temperature of 33.7 8C (Table 2).

Estimating the Effect of Air Pollutants on SG and HbA1c Linear mixed
models were employed to estimate the association between AP exposure and
SG levels and HbA1c in all study groups. AP and meteorological factors
were not highly correlated in our data, with a highest correlation
estimate observed for NO2 and SO2 (r Â¼ 0.34, P < 0.01). Copyright

* 

2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Medicine



Volume 94, Number 27, July 2015

Air Pollution and Serum Glucose Levels

FIGURE 1. The total number of tests and subjects included in the study,
by 3 comparison groups: subjects with normal glucose, impaired fasting
glucose (IFG), and diabetes mellitus (DM). DM patients are stratified by
the treatment type.

NO2 In all groups, SG levels were positively associated with IQR
elevations of average NO2 concentrations 48 and 72 hours before the
blood test. Stronger associations were observed with NO2 concentrations
72 hours before the blood test. Association observed among subjects with
DM were stronger: 1.08% increase (95% CI: 0.86%; 1.29%), compared to
0.40% increase (95% CI: 0.31%; 0.50%) among subjects with normal glucose
levels; and 0.56% increase (95% CI: 0.40%; 0.71%) among subjects with
IFG.

quantile of SG variability (0.79% increase in SG, 95% CI: 0.34--1.25%).
No significant associations were observed with SO2. No effect
modification was found in analyses stratified by age or ethnicity.
Approximately 4% (4756 subjects) of the study population had available
HbA1c tests within the study period (a total of 5715 tests). HbA1c level
ranged between 4% and 20.3%, with a median value of 6.7%. No
associations were found between the different pollutants and HbA1c
levels.

SO2

Sensitivity Analysis

In all groups, SG increases were more pronounced when assessing exposure
to SO2 concentrations 24 hours before the blood test, compared to
prolonged periods of exposure. The highest increase in SG was observed
among subjects with DM: 0.33% increase (95% CI: 0.14%; 0.52%), compared
to 0.29% increase in SG (95% CI: 0.22--0.36%) among subjects with normal
glucose levels; and 0.20% increase in SG (95% CI: 0.10--0.31%) among
subjects with IFG (Table 3). No associations were found with CO, PM10,
or O3 average concentrations 24 to 72 hours before the test, in all
study subgroups.

Identification of Susceptible Population To evaluate possible
interactions with the type of treatment among DM patients, we compared
the percent change in SG levels among DM patients treated only with
Metformin, insulin, or other oral medications, and patients that are not
treated with antidiabetic medications. Weaker associations with NO2 were
observed among untreated patients (1.16% increase in SG, 95% CI:
0.90--1.42%) and among patients treated with Metformin (0.56% increase
in SG, 95% CI: 0.18--0.95%), compared to patients treated with Insulin
(1.81% increase in SG, 95% CI: 0.26--3.38%) or other antidiabetic
medications (2.12% increase in SG, 95% CI: 0.82--3.44%). No significant
associations with SO2 were found in any of the sub groups (Figure 2).
Comparing the lowest and highest quantiles of coefficient of variance
(CV) values, we found stronger association with NO2 among patients
presented high variability in SG (1.53% increase in SG, 95% CI
0.42--2.65%), compared to the lowest Copyright

* 

2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

As a sensitivity analysis, we repeated the analyses using 2 methods of
SES imputation: by assigning the most frequent SES level (low) and the
highest SES level. The results were consistent with the main results and
showed no difference in the inference.

DISCUSSION In this population-based study of 131,882 subjects with over
1 million glucose tests, we were able to detect associations of AP
exposure and SG levels. We found positive associations between SG levels
and NO2 and SO2, among subjects with normal glucose levels, IFG and
diabetes. The association with NO2 was especially pronounced among DM
patients; however, Metformin treatment ameliorated the negative effect
of the pollutant.

Short-Term Exposure In the last few decades, studies have provided
findings linking environmental exposures to IR, SG levels, and metabolic
diseases.2,20,21 Yet, the evidence regarding the association of AP and
glucose metabolism are sparse.1,5,9,10,12,21 Kim et al found positive
associations of PM10, O3, and NO2 with IR. The authors contributed the
lack of association found with SO2 to the different sources of the
pollutants: while PM10, O3, and NO2 are emitted mostly from traffic
sources, SO2 is known to be a combustion product in industries.9 We
found positive associations between SG levels and NO2 and SO2, 72 and 24
hours concentrations before the test. In Southern Israel, other than
natural dust and traffic as AP sources, another www.md-journal.com |

3

Medicine

Sade et al



Volume 94, Number 27, July 2015

TABLE 1. Study Population Characteristics Study Groups Study Population
Characteristics Anti diabetic medications Insulin, % (n) Metformin, %
(n) Other, % (n) Age, mean  SD Male gender, % (n) Chronic conditions:
Ischemic heart disease Myocardial infarction Hypertension Type of
locality, % (n) Jewish, urban Jewish, rural Bedouin, urban Bedouin,
rural  SES, % (n) Low Intermediate High

Normal Glucose, 88,351 Subjects (460,096 Tests)

IFG, 17,460 Subjects (214,039 Tests)

DM, 26,071 Subjects (384,752 Tests)

0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 44.71  18.7 36.53 (32,270)

0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (0) 59.24  17.4 38.99 (6808)

4.51 (1177) 26.2 (6813) 13.4 (3501) 63.03  15.3 41.7 (10,877)

0.78 (693) 1.64 (1449) 0.22 (192)

3.31 (578) 5.49 (958) 0.86 (150)

5.88 (1532) 10.13 (2640) 1.37 (357)

68.33 (60,370) 2.19 (1939) 24.81 (21,922) 4.66 (4120)

82.69 (14,438) 2.28 (398) 13.02 (2273) 2.01 (351)

79.04 (20,638) 2.39 (623) 16.21 (4226) 2.24 (584)

68.41 (52,160) 25.16 (19,183) 6.43 (4901)

62.11 (9163) 31.17 (4598) 6.72 (991)

67.54 (15,295) 27.69 (6272) 4.77 (1080)

DM Â¼ diabetes mellitus, IFG Â¼ impaired fasting glucose, SES Â¼ socio
economic status.  SES---socioeconomic status, defined as the
socioeconomic status of population residing in the proximity of the
person's primary clinic.

potential source is the emissions from an industrial site located
approximately 15 km from the largest city in the area. In accordance
with our findings, a recent meta-analysis found a pooled relative risk
of 1.08 (95% CI: 1.00, 1.17) for type 2 diabetes per 10 mg/m3 increase
in NO2.3 Since the majority of NO2 emissions originate in traffic, the
lack of significant associations reported in other studies22,23 may be
due to low pollution levels and lower effect sizes.10

Susceptible Populations Previously, the majority of the epidemiological
studies investigating AP effect on glucose homeostasis have focused on
diabetic patients, as a group with particularly high susceptibility to
AP-triggered cardiovascular events.25-- 28 Supporting the

hypothesis of higher vulnerability of patients with DM, our study showed
higher associations with both NO2 and SO2. The association with NO2 was
less pronounced among DM patients who presented low variability in SG
results as well as among those treated with Metformin. The same
inflammatory mechanism of AP associated with cardiovascular damage, is
also believed to be involved in the promotion of IR and Type 2
diabetes.22,29 In the present study, we have shown that among patients
with diabetes, those receiving Metformin treatment were resistant to the
AP effect on glucose levels. Insulin sensitizers (eg, Metformin)
suppress proinflammatory genes, therefore may enhance the
antiinflammatory response occurring in the presence of AP exposure.
Rioux and colleagues30 found lower c-reactive protein (CRP) levels among
DM patients residing in proximity to main roads and treated with oral

TABLE 2. Summary Statistics for Daily 24 hours Average Air Pollutant and
Meteorological Data (2001--2012) Daily Levels 3

PM10 (mg/m ) NO2 (ppb) CO (ppm) SO2 (ppb) O3 (ppb) Air temperature (8C)
Relative humidity (%)

Mean  SD

Interquartile Range

Maximal Value

51.41  42.38 10.83  4.64 0.85  0.36 1.86  0.84 35.54  10.02 19.64 
5.74 66.81  15.57

28.52--54.94 7.26--13.62 0.85--1.04 1.22--2.39 28.80--42.59 14.40--24.94
59.75--76.70

240.00 21.00 1.89 4.00 57.00 33.72 100.00

CO Â¼ carbon monoxide, NO2 Â¼ nitrogen dioxide, O3 Â¼ ozone, PM10 Â¼
particular matter smaller than 10 mm in diameter, SD Â¼ standard
deviation, SO2 Â¼ sulfur dioxide. Pollutants' values above the 98th
percentile were defined as outliers and were imputed with the 98th
percentile value.

4

www.md-journal.com

Copyright

* 

2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Medicine



Volume 94, Number 27, July 2015

Air Pollution and Serum Glucose Levels

TABLE 3. The Percent Change in Serum Glucose Levels, Associated With NO2
and SO2 Concentrations, Among Subjects With Normal Glucose Levels;
Impaired Fasting Glucose and Diabetes Patients Percent Change in Serum
Glucose Levels (95% Confidence Intervals) Pollutants 24--72 hours
Average Concentrations NO2 24 hours NO2 48 hours NO2 72 hours SO2 24
hours SO2 48 hours SO2 72 hours

Normal Glucose Levels 0.20% 0.25% 0.40% 0.29% 0.12% 0.04%



(0.13%; 0.28%)  (0.17%; 0.34%)  (0.31%; 0.50%)  (0.22%; 0.36%) 
(0.05%; 0.20%) (0.07%; 0.07%)

Impaired Fasting Glucose 0.43% 0.49% 0.56% 0.20% 0.04% 0.05%



(0.32%; 0.54%)  (0.34%; 0.63%)  (0.40%; 0.71%)  (0.10%; 0.31%) 
(0.07%; 0.16%) (0.18%; 0.06%)

Diabetes Mellitus 0.09 0.84 1.08 0.33 0.27 0.18

% % % % % %

(0.10%; 0.29%)  (0.64%; 1.03%)  (0.86%; 1.29%)  (0.14%; 0.52%) 
(0.09%; 0.44%)  (0.00%; 0.37%)

This table shows the percent change in serum glucose levels for
interquartile range (IQR) elevation of SO2 (1.17 ppb) and NO2 (6.36 ppb)
average concentrations 24--72 hours before the test, with 95% confidence
intervals. The coefficients were back-transformed using the following
formula: EXP  ((b IQR)  1)  100. Where EXP Â¼ exponential value, b Â¼
the regression coefficient, and IQR Â¼ the pollutants' interquartile
range. Models were performed separately in subjects with normal glucose
levels; impaired fasting glucose treated and untreated diabetes, and
were adjusted for day of the week, year, average temperature and
relative humidity, gender, age, hypertension, and socioeconomic status.
Among patients with diabetes, models were also adjusted for the purchase
of antidiabetic drugs 3 months before the test.  P < 0.05.

hypoglycemic medications versus nontreated, supporting the hypothesis of
an antiinflammatory downregulation process.

Health Implications Assessing the results of our study, the main
question that can be asked by the clinicians is: what is the health
effect of these relatively numerically small observed associations
between the air pollutants and glucose levels? The answer is 2-fold: the
effect is clinically significant both on a population and individual
levels. Given the broad extent of exposed population and the continuous
nature of exposure, even small adverse associations represent a public
health concern and may have implications on public health policies.20
Because the whole population is exposed, even small effects can be
translated into substantial attributable adverse health outcomes.31

Another aspect that should be considered on an individual level is the
chronic exposure effect. As short-term studies describe only part of the
air-pollution-related adverse outcomes,31 while the cumulative lifetime
risk is probably larger than the usually assessed acute risk. The
cumulative adverse health effects are related to a combination of
exposure intensity and duration. Therefore, even numerically small acute
effects, such as observed in our study, can be translated into a
profound detrimental clinical effect over longer period. Glucose levels
increasing due to the AP both within and above normal range can
contribute to the development of vascular morbidity. As reported in the
findings of the Honolulu Heart Study, the risk of CHD increases
continuously as glucose levels increases,32 emphasizing the importance
of glycemic control and glucose reduction, even in small amount and
within

FIGURE 2. The percent change in serum glucose levels for IQR elevation
of NO2 (6.36 ppb) and SO2 (1.17 ppb) concentration 72 hours before the
test, with 95% confidence intervals. The coefficients were
back-transformed using the following formula: EXP  ((b IQR)  1)100.
Where EXP Â¼ exponential value, b Â¼ the regression coefficient, and IQR Â¼
the pollutants' interquartile range. Models were performed separately
among untreated patients with diabetes, and among patients treated with
Insulin, Metformin, or other antidiabetic medications. Models were
adjusted for day of the week, year, average temperature and relative
humidity, gender, age, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, hypertension,
and the purchase of antidiabetic medications 3 months before the test.
IQR Â¼ interquartile  range; P < 0.05. Copyright

* 

2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

www.md-journal.com |

5

Medicine

Sade et al

the normal range. Furthermore, higher glucose levels were reported to be
associated with cardiovascular disease, even within the range of normal
glucose levels.33 That said, the AP related increases in glucose found
in our study were relatively small. In order to establish cardiovascular
risk the effect of lifetime chronic exposure should be estimated.

LIMITATIONS Our study had a number of limitations. First, AP data for
our study period were available only from 1 monitoring site, located in
the center of the largest city in the region. To reduce exposure
measurement error we excluded subjects residing farther than 20 km from
the monitoring site. Therefore, the rural and suburban population is
underrepresented in our study. In addition, using this method, we were
unable to estimate the variations in AP in rural versus urban locations.
Second, the use of medications and laboratory results for DM definition
might have resulted in misclassification, as well. Both limitations
might have decreased the magnitude of the associations estimated in the
study. In addition, data of potential confounders such as BMI and
smoking status were not available in this study, which precluded a more
detailed adjustment of the study finding. SES level was assigned based
on the SES of the population residing in the close proximity to the
subjects' primary clinic, but we did not have data regarding the exact
estimated SES of each subject, therefore residual confounding by SES
might still be present. Lastly, given the small amount of available
HbA1c tests in our study, the analysis might not had the power required
to detect relatively small differences and long-term associations.

CONCLUSION In summary, in this population-based study, we found small
but consistent increases in SG associated with short-term exposure to
NO2 and SO2; especially pronounced among patients with DM who were not
treated with Metformin. Given the chronic lifetime exposure to AP and
the broad extent of exposed population, even small associations such as
those found in our study may have profound public and individual health
implications. REFERENCES 1. Sun Q, Yue P, Deiuliis JA, et al. Ambient
air pollution exaggerates adipose inflammation and insulin resistance in
a mouse model of diet-induced obesity. Circulation. 2009;119:538--546.
2. Pearson JF, Bachireddy C, Shyamprasad S, et al. Association between
fine particulate matter and diabetes prevalence in the U.S. Diabetes
Care. 2010;33:2196--2201. 3. Eze CI, Hemkens GL, Bucher CH, et al.
Association between ambient air pollution and diabetes mellitus in
Europe and North America: systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ
Health Perspect. 2015;52:258--262. 4. Andersen ZJ, Raaschou-Nielsen O,
Ketzel M, et al. Diabetes incidence and long-term exposure to air
pollution: a cohort study. Diabetes Care. 2012;35:92--98. 5. Chuang K-J,
Yan Y-H, Cheng T-J. Effect of air pollution on blood pressure, blood
lipids, and blood sugar: a population-based approach. J Occup Environ
Med. 2010;52:258--262. 6. Kim SY, O'Neill MS, Lee JT, et al. Air
pollution, socioeconomic position, and emergency hospital visits for
asthma in Seoul, Korea. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2007;80:701--710.

6

www.md-journal.com



Volume 94, Number 27, July 2015

7.  Fleisch AF, Gold DR, Rifas-Shiman SL, et al. Abnormal glucose
    tolerance during pregnancy: the project Viva cohort. Environ Health
    Perspect. 2014;122:378--383.
8.  Park SK, Wang W. Ambient air pollution and type 2 diabetes mellitus:
    a systematic review of epidemiologic research. Curr Environ Health
    Rep. 2014;1:275--286.
9.  Kim JH, Hong Y-C. GSTM1, GSTT1, and GSTP1 polymorphisms and
    associations between air pollutants and markers of insulin
    resistance in elderly Koreans. Environ Health Perspect.
    2012;120:1378--1384.
10. Teichert T, Vossoughi M, VierkoÌtter A, et al. Association between
    traffic-related air pollution, subclinical inflammation and impaired
    glucose metabolism: results from the SALIA study. PLoS ONE.
    2013;8:e83042doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083042.
11. Thiering E, Cyrys J, Kratzsch J, et al. Long-term exposure to
    trafficrelated air pollution and insulin resistance in children:
    results from the GINIplus and LISAplus birth cohorts. Diabetologia.
    2013;56:1696--1704.
12. Xu X, Liu C, Xu Z, et al. Long-term exposure to ambient fine
    particulate pollution induces insulin resistance and mitochondrial
    alteration in adipose tissue. Toxicol Sci. 2011;124:88--98.
13. Zheng Z, Xu X, Zhang X, et al. Exposure to ambient particulate
    matter induces a NASH-like phenotype and impairs hepatic glucose
    metabolism in an animal model. J Hepatol. 2013;58:148--154.
14. Brook RD, Xu X, Bard RL, et al. Reduced metabolic insulin
    sensitivity following sub-acute exposures to low levels of ambient
    fine particulate matter air pollution. Sci Total Environ.
    2013;448:66--71.
15. Chen J-C, Schwartz J. Metabolic syndrome and inflammatory responses
    to long-term particulate air pollutants. Environ Health Perspect.
    2008;116:612--617.
16. Peled R, Tal A, Pliskin JS, et al. A computerized surveillance
    system for the quality of care in childhood asthma. J Healthc Qual.
    2005;27:28--33.
17. Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS). Characterization and
    classification of geographical units by the socio-economic level of
    the population. 2008.
    http://www.cbs.gov.il/webpub/pub/text\_page\_eng.html?publ=100&CYear=2008&CMonth=1.
    [Accessed December 22, 2014].
18. American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and classification of
    diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(Suppl. 1):S81--S90.
19. Ganor E, Stupp A, Alpert P. A method to determine the effect of
    mineral dust aerosols on air quality. Atmos Environ. 2009;43:5463--
20. 
21. Rajagopalan S, Brook RD. Air pollution and type 2 diabetes:
    mechanistic insights. Diabetes. 2012;61:3037--3045.
22. Chuang K-J, Yan Y-H, Chiu S-Y, et al. Long-term air pollution
    exposure and risk factors for cardiovascular diseases among the
    elderly in Taiwan. Occup Environ Med. 2011;68:64--68.
23. Brook RD, Jerrett M, Brook JR, et al. The relationship between
    diabetes mellitus and traffic-related air pollution. J Occup Environ
    Med. 2008;50:32--38.
24. Dijkema MB, Mallant SF, Gehring U, et al. Long-term exposure to
    traffic-related air pollution and type 2 diabetes prevalence in a
    crosssectional screening-study in the Netherlands. Environ Health.
    2011;10:10--1186doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-10-76.
25. Tamayo T, Rathmann W, KraÌmer U, et al. Is particle pollution in
    outdoor air associated with metabolic control in type 2 diabetes?
    PloS ONE. 2014;9:e91639.
26. O'Neill MS, Veves A, Zanobetti A, et al. Diabetes enhances
    vulnerability to particulate air pollution---associated impairment
    in vascular reactivity and endothelial function. Circulation.
    2005;111:2913--2920.

Copyright

* 

2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Medicine



Volume 94, Number 27, July 2015

26. Jarczok MN, Li J, Mauss D, et al. Heart rate variability is
    associated with glycemic status after controlling for components of
    the metabolic syndrome. Int J Cardiol. 2013;167:855--861.
27. Schneider A, Neas LM, Graff DW, et al. Association of cardiac and
    vascular changes with ambient PM2.5 in diabetic individuals. Part
    Fibre Toxicol. 2010;7:14doi: 10.1186/17438977-7-14.

Air Pollution and Serum Glucose Levels

30. Rioux CL, Tucker KL, Brugge D, et al. Traffic exposure in a
    population with high prevalence type 2 diabetes---do medications
    influence concentrations of C-reactive protein? Environ Pollut
    (Barking, Essex: 1987). 2011;159:2051--2060.
31. Kunzli N, Kaiser R, Medina S, et al. Public-health impact of outdoor
    and traffic-related air pollution: a European assessment. Lancet.
    2000;356: 795--801.

32. Zanobetti A, Schwartz J. Cardiovascular damage by airborne
    particles: are diabetics more susceptible? Epidemiology (Cambridge,
    Mass). 2002;13:588--592.

33. Scheidtnave C, Barrettconnor E, Wingard DL, et al. Sex-differences
    in fasting glycemia as a risk factor for ischemic-heart-disease
    death. Am J Epidemiol. 1991;133:565--576.

34. Wellen KE, Hotamisligil GS. Inflammation, stress, and diabetes. J
    Clin Invest. 2005;115:1111--1119.

35. Gerstein HC. Glucose: a continuous risk factor for cardiovascular
    disease. Diabet Med. 1997;14:S25--S31.

Copyright

* 

2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

www.md-journal.com |

7


