Research Long-term Exposure to PM2.5 and Incidence of Acute Myocardial
Infarction Jaime Madrigano,1,2,3 Itai Kloog,3 Robert Goldberg,4 Brent A.
Coull,3,5 Murray A. Mittleman,6,7 and Joel Schwartz 3,7 1The

Earth Institute, and 2Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA; 3Department of Environmental
Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;
4University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts,
USA; 5Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 6Cardiovascular Epidemiology Research Unit,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;
7Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA

Background: A number of studies have shown associations between chronic
exposure to particulate air pollution and increased mortality,
particularly from cardiovascular disease, but fewer studies have
examined the association between long-term exposure to fine particulate
air pollution and speci­fic cardiovascular events, such as acute
myocardial infarction (AMI). Objective: We examined how long-term
exposure to area particulate matter affects the onset of AMI, and we
distinguished between area and local pollutants. Methods: Building on
the Worcester Heart Attack Study, an ongoing community-wide investi­
ga­tion examining changes over time in myocardial infarction incidence
in greater Worcester, Massachusetts, we conducted a case--control study
of 4,467 confirmed cases of AMI diagnosed between 1995 and 2003 and
9,072 matched controls selected from Massachusetts resident lists. We
used a prediction model based on satellite aerosol optical depth (AOD)
measurements to generate both exposure to particulate matter ≤ 2.5 μm in
diameter (PM2.5) at the area level (10 × 10 km) and the local level
(100 m) based on local land use variables. We then examined the
association between area and local particulate pollution and occurrence
of AMI. Results: An interquartile range (IQR) increase in area PM2.5
(0.59 μg/m3) was associated with a 16% increase in the odds of AMI
(95% CI: 1.04, 1.29). An IQR increase in total PM2.5 (area + local,
1.05 μg/m3) was weakly associated with a 4% increase in the odds of AMI
(95% CI: 0.96, 1.11). Conclusions: Residential exposure to PM2.5 may
best be represented by a combination of area and local PM2.5, and it is
important to consider spatial gradients within a single metropolitan
area when examining the relationship between particulate matter exposure
and cardiovascular events. K ey words : air pollution. Environ Health
Perspect 121:192--196 (2013).  http://dx.doi. org/10.1289/ehp.1205284
[Online 29 November 2012]

Several studies have shown associations between chronic exposure to
particulate air pollution and increased mortality, particularly from
cardiovascular disease (Dockery et al. 1993; Pope et al. 2004; Puett
et al. 2009). Fewer studies, however, have examined the association
between long-term exposure to fine particulate air pollution, such as
particulate matter ≤ 2.5 μm in diameter (PM2.5), and specific
cardiovascular outcomes, such as acute myocardial infarction (AMI). A
syste­matic review of the association between air pollution and the
incidence of MI concluded that the evidence for long-term effects, in
contrast to short-term effects, of air pollution on MI risk is limited
and few conclusions could be drawn (Bhaskaran et al. 2009). This may be
in part because of the limited number of AMIs in many cohort studies.
Furthermore, spatial gradients within metro­politan areas are
increasingly being identified as important in the association between
particulate air pollution and health outcomes. Findings suggest that
spatial gradients within cities might be as large, or larger, as those
between cities (Hoek et al. 2002; Jerrett et al. 2005). In one of the
few cohort studies that has investigated long-term exposure to PM2.5 and
incidence of cardio­vascular events, a larger association with AMI was
found for an exposure

192

increase of 10 μg/m3 within cities than between cities (Miller et al.
2007). The hazard ratio for AMI did not reach statistical significance,
but this study had limited statistical power because of the relatively
small number (n = 584) of events. This limitation is a common problem
for even large cohort studies; the incidence of AMI in a decade is not
high enough to produce a large number of cases. In such circumstances,
case--control studies are an attractive alternative. We previously found
an association between traffic particles and occurrence of AMI in
case--control studies within a single metropolitan area (Tonne et al.
2007, 2009). Our earlier analyses included indicators of traffic as a
proxy for long-term exposure to traffic pollutants as well as a
latent-variable approach to model residential exposure to traffic
particles. Hence, it did not capture any effects of particles other than
primary traffic particles. To gain a better understanding of how
long-term exposure to area particulate matter affects the onset of AMI,
and to distinguish between area and local pollutants, we examined both
of these measures simultaneously in our analysis. In the present study,
we used a PM2.5-prediction model based on satellite aerosol optical
depth (AOD) measurements (Kloog et al. 2011). The model generates area
particulate air pollution predictions in addition to local particulate
volume

pollution based on local land use variables, both of which are assigned
according to residential address. We then examined the association
between both area and local particulate pollution and incidence of AMI
using a case--control study design.

Methods Study population. Cases of AMI included in this study were drawn
from the Worcester Heart Attack Study, an ongoing communitywide
investigation examining changes over time in the incidence and
case-fatality rates of independently confirmed cases of AMI in resi­
dents of the greater Worcester, Massachusetts, area who were
hospitalized with MI at all area medical centers. The details of this
study have been described previously (Floyd et al. 2009; Goldberg et al.
1988, 1999). In brief, during the 5 years under study for the present
investigation (1995, 1997, 1999, 2001, and 2003), the medical records of
the 11 acute care general hospitals serving residents of the Worcester
metropolitan area were searched for patients with a possible discharge
diagnosis of AMI. The records were reviewed and validated according to
diagnostic cri­teria described previously (Floyd et al. 2009; Goldberg
et al. 1988), and at least two of the following criteria were required
for inclusion in the original study: a suggestive clinical history,
increased serum biomarker levels above each hospital's normal range, and
serial electrocardiographic findings indicative of AMI. The present
Address correspondence to J.   Madrigano, Department of Environmental
Health Sciences, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University,
722 West 168th St., 11th Floor, New York, New York 10032 USA. Telephone:
(212) 305-3464. E-mail: jm3731@columbia.edu We thank the participating
hospitals in the Worcester, Massachusetts, metro­politan area whose
cooperation made this study possible. This work was supported by the
National Institutes of Health (grant RO1 HL35434), and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA; grant RD 83479801). The contents
of this article are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official views of the U.S. EPA. Further, the
U.S. EPA does not endorse the purchase of any commercial products or
services mentioned in the publication. The authors declare they have no
actual or potential competing financial interests. Received 29 March
2012; accepted 29 September 2012.

121 | number 2 | February 2013  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

PM2.5 and acute myocardial infarction

investigation was limited to patients ≥ 25 years of age who were
hospitalized with independently confirmed AMI. Population controls were
randomly selected from resident lists published in 2003. Resident lists
are published annually by each town in Massachusetts and include all
residents ≥ 17 years of age. Inclusion in the list is mandated by state
law and is based on response to a mailing or visit by the town
registrar. Information included in the lists varied from town to town,
but at a minimum included name, street address, sex, and year of birth.
There were twice as many controls selected for the present investigation
as there were cases. Controls were frequency-matched to cases on the
basis of age (in 10-year cate­ gories), sex, and section of the study
area (one of three regions of roughly equal population), such that
controls were selected independently of residential location within
section. The study area sections were central Worcester, the northern
suburbs, and the southern suburbs. Cases' residential addresses at the
time of AMI were collected from the review of hospital medical records,
and the controls' residential addresses were extracted from the resident
lists. Addresses were sent to a commercial firm for geocoding (Mapping
Analytics, Rochester, NY). The study was approved by the Committee for
the Protection of Human Subjects at the University of Massachusetts
Medical School and the Human Subjects Committee at the Harvard School of
Public Health and was exempt from informed consent requirements.
Exposure. Our long-term exposures of interest were area PM2.5 and
residual local PM2.5 pollution due to traffic. Both long-term area PM2.5
and local PM2.5 exposure at the residence for the year 2000 were
generated by a novel exposure model developed recently by Kloog et al.
(2011) for assessing temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures
for epidemiological studies. This new method uses MODIS (Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) satellite-derived AOD measurements
to predict daily PM2.5 concentration levels at a 10 × 10 km spatial
resolution in New England beginning in the year 2000 based on daily
physical measurements of a surrogate for PM2.5 concentrations in each
grid cell. In brief, we performed day-specific calibrations of AOD data
using ground PM2.5 measurements from 78 monitoring stations and land use
regression and meteorological variables (temperature, wind speed,
visibility, elevation, distance to major roads, percent of open space,
point emissions, and area emissions). To estimate PM2.5 concentrations
in each grid cell on each day we calibrated the AOD--PM2.5 relationship
for each day using data from grid cells with both monitor and AOD
values, using mixed models with random slopes for day and nested
regions. In a second stage, we estimated exposures on

days when AOD measures were not available (due to cloud coverage or
snow, for example). A model was fit with a smooth function of latitude
and longitude and a random intercept for each cell (similar to universal
kriging) that takes advantage of associations between grid cell AOD
values and PM2.5 data from monitors located elsewhere and associations
with available AOD values in neighboring grid cells. To validate our
model, the data set was repeatedly randomly divided into 90% and 10%
splits. Predictions for the held-out 10% of the data were made from the
model fit of the remaining 90% of the data. This “out of sample” process
was repeated 10 times and cross-validated R 2 values were computed. The
first stage calibrations resulted in high outof-sample 10-fold
cross-validated R 2 (mean out-of-sample R 2 = 0.85). Even for
locationday combinations without AOD data (the second stage models), our
model performance was excellent (mean out-of-sample R 2 = 0.81).
Importantly, these R 2 are for daily observations, rather than monthly
or yearly values. To check for bias we regressed the measured PM2.5
values against the predicted values in each site on each day. To
estimate traffic particle exposures at the local level, we used local
(100 m) land use terms (distance to primary highways, distance to point
source emissions, population density, percent of open spaces, elevation,
and traffic density) to model the difference between the 10 × 10 km grid
cell predictions and monitored values. We regressed the residuals for
each monitor against local land use characteristics for each monitor and
a smooth function of traffic density. The local PM2.5 term provides an
estimate of traffic-related local particulate pollution that is
spatio­temporally correlated with PM2.5. Finally, as an estimate of the
total outdoor PM2.5 exposure at residential location, we summed the
local and area PM2.5 terms. Covariates. Because our exposure varied
spatially, confounding by spatially varying covariates was an issue. We
obtained areabased measures of socio­economic status (SES) from the year
2000 census at the block group level (U.S. Census Bureau 2000b). The
following SES measures were obtained: proportion of the population with
1999 income below the federally defined poverty level, median household
income in 1999, and percentage of persons ≥ 25 years of age whose
highest degree was less than a high school diploma or its equivalent.
Census block groups have a population of about 1,500 individuals and are
defined by the Census Bureau as small statistical subdivisions of
counties with generally stable boundaries, designed to have relatively
homogeneous demographic and economic characteristics (U.S. Census Bureau
2000a). Census block group data on poverty have been shown to be a
relatively sensitive measure of

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 121 | number 2 | February
2013

socio­economic inequalities in health outcomes (Krieger et al. 2002).
Individual lifestyle factors, such as dietary patterns, obesity, and
level of exercise, may be correlated with place of residence. Although
such lifestyle factors were unavailable for the cases and controls in
our study, we attempted to control for such factors by proxy. Obesity
preva­lence, as well as fruit and vegetable consumption, have been
associated with distance to large supermarkets (defined as having
> 50 employees) in metropolitan areas (Michimi and Wimberly 2010),
whereas access to parks, walking and jogging trails, and enjoyable
scenery have been associated with physical activity behavior (Brownson
et al. 2001). ArcGIS version 10.1 (ESRI, Redlands, CA) was used to
calculate the straight-line distance between residential addresses and
large supermarkets. Locations of large supermarkets were available from
the 2006 infoUSA Business Listing File from ESRI's Business Analyst
Extension. Data on recreation areas was downloaded from the MassGIS web
site (MassGIS 2012). Statistical analysis. We first ran logistic
regression models adjusted only for the matching factors---age, sex, and
section of the study area. Although we matched on 10-year age groups, we
included age in our models as a continuous, linear term, thus
controlling more finely for this covariate. We also included all
higher-order (2- and 3-way) interaction terms for the matching factors
in our models. Next, we included measures of block group population
density and SES, distance to the nearest large supermarket, and distance
to nearest recreation area in our models. Finally, we used generalized
estimating equations (GEEs) assuming an exchangeable corre­lation
structure within census block group and census tract to account for any
remaining correlation among subjects in the same block group (or census
tract) not captured by model covariates. We ran two sets of models: the
first with separate terms for area and local PM2.5, and the second with
a term for their sum. In addition, we repeated GEE models restricted to
first (vs. any) AMI, and after stratifying by section of the study area,
and by time period (1995, 1997, and 1999; or 2001 and 2003). All models
were conducted using PROC GENMOD in SAS version 9.2 (SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary, NC).

Results Exposure and covariate information by study area section for
cases and controls is presented in Table 1. Figure 1 shows the
residential location for our study subjects according to their
10 × 10 km pollution grid cell. Exposure was divided into two parts:
a) area PM2.5 predicted for the 10 × 10 km grid cell that each case or
control lived in, and b) local PM2.5 from the local land use prediction
model. In the year

193

Madrigano et al.

2000, the interquartile range (IQR) for area PM2.5 was 0.6 μg/m3, and
the IQR for local PM2.5 was 1.1 μg/m3. Area PM2.5 was highest in
section 2 of our study area, but there was more variability in this
exposure metric in sections 1 and 3 (Table 1). Local PM2.5 (and the
variability of local PM2.5 estimates) was highest in section 1. We also
examined the degree to which exposure was correlated with area-based
measures of SES in control subjects. There was moderate correlation
between area PM2.5 and percent poverty within a census block group
(r = 0.35), but a small inverse correlation with local PM2.5
(r = --0.07), resulting in a weak correction with total PM2.5 (r = 0.1).
In our models adjusted only for matching factors, exposure to area PM2.5
was associated with occurrence of AMI. This association was robust to
additional adjustment for population density, SES, distance to a large
super­market, and distance to a recreation area, although slightly
attenuated (Table 2). An IQR increase in area PM2.5 (0.59 μg/m3) was
associated with a 16% increase in the odds of AMI (95% CI: 1.04,  1.29).
IQR increases in local PM2.5 (1.08 μg/m3) and total PM2.5 (1.05 μg/m3)
were weakly associated with occurrence of AMI after adjusting for area
PM2.5 and other covariates (Table 2). Estimates from models with an
exchangeable correlation structure for census block group or tract were
not materially different. Restricting the outcome to first (vs. any) AMI
had little influence on associations; however, estimates varied somewhat
among the three study area sections and when stratified according to
time period (Table 3).

PM10 or PM2.5 and cardio­vascular disease mortality (Dockery et al.
1993; Krewski et al. 2009; Miller et al. 2007; Puett et al. 2009), few
have looked at specific outcomes such as AMI. In two prospective studies
of women, one across the United States and one in the Northeast and
Midwest regions of the country, elevated, but not statistically
significant, hazard ratios were found for incident MI in association
with an increase of 10 μg/m3 of PM2.5, with exposure based on either
nearest monitor (Miller et al. 2007) or a spatio­temporal

regression model (Puett et  al. 2009). The relatively small number of
incident cases in the two studies (< 1,000 in each) may partly explain
these findings. In contrast, the present study included > 4,000 incident
cases of AMI. Previous analyses (Tonne et  al. 2007, 2009) of the
Worcester Heart Attack Study, a population-based case--control study,
indicated that exposure to traffic particles was associated with
occurrence of AMI. In the present study, we found an association between
the occurrence of AMI and exposure to regional PM2.5

N

Residential location cases Residential location controls PM2.5
monitoring stations Major roads Study areas PM2.5 concentration (µg/m3)
6.85--8.02 8.03--8.74 8.75--9.21

Discussion

9.22--9.65

In the present analysis, we observed an association between long-term
exposure to area PM2.5, a regional air pollutant, and occurrence of AMI.
Although several studies have found associations between long-term
exposure to

9.66--10.09 0

10

10.10--10.66

Km

10.67--12.63

Figure 1. Map of the study area (Worcester, MA) showing the residential
location of subjects (cases and controls) with a sample mean PM2.5
(µg/m3) 10 × 10 km pollution grid for the year 2000.

Table 1. Characteristics of cases and controls by study section
[mean ± SD or n (%)]. All Cases (n = 4,467) 70 ± 14 2,559 (57.3)
1,848 ± 2,350

Section 1 Controls (n = 9,072) 69 ± 14 5,228 (57.6) 1,695 ± 2,178

Characteristic Age (years) Male Population density (individuals per km2)
Distance to large 2.9 ± 2.6 2.8 ± 2.6 supermarket (km) Distance to
recreation 532 ± 574 538 ± 523 area (m) Block group SES Median income
($) 48,034 ± 19,201 49,836 ± 18,457 Percent residents living 10.6 ± 11.7
9.1 ± 10.4 < the poverty line Percent residents with 17.9 ± 12.3
16.4 ± 11.2 < high school education Exposure (μg/m3) Area PM2.5
9.43 ± 0.44 9.39 ± 0.45 Local PM2.5 1.07 ± 1.56 1.04 ± 1.36 Total PM2.5
10.50 ± 1.55 10.44 ± 1.36

194

Section 2

Section 3

Cases (n = 1,546) 70 ± 14 935 (60.5) 648 ± 596

Controls (n = 3,196) 69 ± 14 1,937 (60.6) 655 ± 631

Cases (n = 2,074) 71 ± 14 1,130 (54.5) 3,250 ± 2,786

Controls (n = 4,296) 71 ± 14 2,362 (55.0) 2,905 ± 2,606

Cases (n = 847) 68 ± 14 494 (58.3) 605 ± 693

Controls (n = 1,580) 67 ± 15 929 (58.8) 509 ± 627

4.1 ± 3.4

3.7 ± 3.3

1.6 ± 0.8

1.6 ± 0.8

4.0 ± 2.3

4.5 ± 2.5

452 ± 430

470 ± 469

429 ± 302

469 ± 308

932 ± 990

861 ± 862

59,460 ± 17,839 59,984 ± 16,864 4.7 ± 3.8 4.3 ± 3.5

37,847 ± 16,419 40,868 ± 16,726 16.5 ± 14.3 13.7 ± 13.0

52,121 ± 13,960 53,695 ± 13,352 6.9 ± 5.0 6.3 ± 4.5

10.5 ± 6.7

10.4 ± 6.2

23.7 ± 13.5

21.2 ± 12.7

17.4 ± 9.0

15.7 ± 8.6

9.29 ± 0.51 1.12 ± 2.36 10.41 ± 2.37

9.24 ± 0.51 1.07 ± 1.95 10.31 ± 1.97

9.58 ± 0.3 1.03 ± 0.85 10.6 ± 0.79

9.54 ± 0.33 1.04 ± 0.85 10.58 ± 0.8

9.34 ± 0.49 1.08 ± 0.93 10.42 ± 0.96

9.30 ± 0.48 1.01 ± 0.94 10.3 ± 0.96

volume

121 | number 2 | February 2013  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

PM2.5 and acute myocardial infarction

while controlling for fine-scale variation in particulate air pollution
that may be due to local traffic. We modeled exposure of PM2.5 based on
daily measurements of AOD in 32 grid cells across Worcester County. The
use of actual spatially resolved measurements is an important advantage
over land use regression (LUR), which is calibrated using space- and
time-limited monitoring data, and our model performed better in
out-of-sample validation than reported previously in other LUR-based
models (Kloog et al. 2011). LUR models are calibrated only at measuring
sites; our model benefits by incorporating physical measurements (via
satellite data) over the entire spatial domain. In addition, satellite
AOD data may be used to fit LUR models in locations without ground
monitors, and may reduce bias due to non-random placement of monitors.
We separated estimates for local- and area-level pollution in our
modeling. The first phase used the model developed by Kloog et al.
(2011) to estimate average PM2.5 concentrations on a 10 km grid. In the
second phase, we took the residuals between the actual monitored value
in each grid and the predicted mean value for each grid, which
presumably reflect the influence of local conditions near each
monitoring site, and regressed them against land use terms within 100 m
of the monitor to account for the effects of these local sources. This
model was then used to estimate local particle concentrations at the
addresses of study participants. Because the land use regression is fit
to the difference between the monitored value and the grid cell
prediction, this

local contribution is independent of the grid cell value, allowing us to
examine the different sources of particle exposure with less
collinearity in our model. A unique advantage of this approach is that
it allows us to look at these exposure metrics separately and together,
allowing for a best estimate of a subject's residential outdoor PM2.5
exposure. Because the measure of total PM2.5 comprised two estimates
with different spatial variability, it had little correlation with area
SES characteristics, such as percent families living in poverty, and
therefore the association between this metric and AMI may suffer less
from residual confounding. In the northeastern United States, PM2.5 is
composed predominantly of secondary organics and sulfate aerosols.
Sulfate aerosols are formed from the oxidation of sulfur dioxide (SO2)
emitted from fossil fuel combustion, and it is estimated that 70% of the
SO2 emissions in the United States are from electricity-­generating
facilities (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2009). Formation of
secondary organic aerosols is not as fully understood as that of
particulate sulfate, but a portion of their formation is attributed to
aromatic hydrocarbon precursors under nitrogen oxide (NOX)-limiting
conditions, and NOX is, like SO2, also emitted from fossil fuel
combustion, including motor vehicle exhaust. Prior work in this cohort
was focused on traffic-related air pollution, which was measured using
exposure proxies and a latent variable model (Tonne et al. 2007, 2009).
However, in the present analysis we were able to estimate personal
exposure to total PM2.5, which was not solely due to traffic. A

Table 2. Relative odds [OR (95% CI)] of AMI among cases and controls.
Model Area PM2.5 onlya Area PM2.5 and local PM2.5a Area PM2.5 and local
PM2.5b GEE models with exchangeable correlation within census block
groupb GEE models with exchangeable correlation within census tractb

Area PM2.5 1.15 (1.09, 1.21) 1.16 (1.10, 1.22) 1.12 (1.06, 1.18) 1.16
(1.04, 1.29)

Local PM2.5 --- 1.03 (1.00, 1.06) 1.03 (1.00, 1.07) 1.03 (0.97, 1.10)

Total PM2.5 --- 1.04 (1.01, 1.08) 1.04 (1.00, 1.07) 1.04 (0.96, 1.11)

1.18 (1.04, 1.35)

1.03 (0.98, 1.09)

1.03 (0.97, 1.10)

OR per IQR of pollutant; the IQR was 0.59 μg/m3 for area PM2.5,
1.08 μg/m3 for local PM2.5, and 1.05 μg/m3 for total PM2.5. aAdjusted
for matching factors (age, sex, and study area section) and interaction
terms of matching factors. bAdjusted for matching factors (age, sex, and
study area section), interaction terms of matching factors, population
density, SES, distance to large supermarket, and distance to recreation
area.

Table 3. Relative odds [OR (95% CI)] of AMI among cases and controls.
Stratification factor AMI order First AMI Any AMI Study section 1 2 3
Study period 1995, 1997, 1999 2001, 2003

Area PM2.5

Local PM2.5

Total PM2.5

1.19 (1.06, 1.33) 1.16 (1.04, 1.29)

1.04 (1.00, 1.09) 1.03 (0.97, 1.10)

1.05 (1.00, 1.11) 1.04 (0.97, 1.11)

1.24 (1.04, 1.48) 1.18 (1.04, 1.35) 1.06 (0.83, 1.34)

1.01 (0.96, 1.06) 1.06 (0.98, 1.14) 1.11 (0.99, 1.24)

1.01 (0.95, 1.07) 1.06 (0.98, 1.13) 1.10 (0.99, 1.23)

1.10 (0.98, 1.24) 1.18 (1.05, 1.32)

1.03 (0.98, 1.08) 1.00 (0.96, 1.03)

1.03 (0.98, 1.09) 1.00 (0.96, 1.05)

OR per IQR of pollutant; the IQR was 0.59 μg/m3 for area PM2.5,
1.08 μg/m3 for local PM2.5, and 1.05 μg/m3 for total PM2.5. GEE models
were used with exchangeable correlation within census block group;
adjusted for matching factors (age, sex, and study area section),
interaction terms of matching factors, population density, SES, distance
to large super­ market, and distance to recreation area.

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 121 | number 2 | February
2013

key contribution of the present analysis is the finding that transported
particles, as well as local traffic particles, are associated with
cardiovascular disease. Through the use of our spatio­temporal
regression model, we also identified an association between AMI and a
relatively small amount of variation in PM2.5 exposure within a single
New England metropolitan area over the course of a calendar year. These
results are consistent with findings from the Women's Health Initiative
Observational Study, where the association between PM2.5 and
cardiovascular events was stronger within-cities than betweencities
(Miller et al. 2007). Taken together, these findings indicate that it is
important to examine variation in exposure within a single metropolitan
area, even when examining regional air pollutants, such as PM2.5. Our
results were not attenuated when accounting for spatial dependence,
possibly because of the varying spatial scales of our exposure metrics.
As expected, local sources made the greatest contribution to variation
in particulate matter exposure, and therefore local PM2.5 accounted for
most of the variation in total PM2.5 in this single metropolitan area.
However, there was enough variation in area PM2.5 to detect an
independent association with that exposure metric as well. Fine control
for socio­economic factors at the block group level, which in urban
areas is quite small, had little effect on associations with PM2.5. This
is consistent with a recent publication of Brochu et  al. (2011), who
showed that PM2.5 concentrations were associated with measures of
poverty, education, and income over long spatial scales representing
regional and between-city differences, but not on the finer within-city
spatial scale, suggesting that studies focusing on within-city spatial
variation will have little confounding with SES measures. Indeed, we
found low-to-moderate correlation between our exposure metrics and
measures of socio­economic characteristics at the population level. In
contrast to our previous analysis speci­ fically examining traffic
particles, we only found a weak association between our measure of local
PM2.5 pollution and occurrence of AMI. Our estimate of “residual” local
variation in particulate matter can be thought of as the incremental
effect, beyond that captured by area PM2.5, of particulate air
pollution. The fact that it represents only an incremental effect, or
that it captures a different source of pollution, may explain this
difference. A number of mechanisms by which longterm exposure to PM2.5
may impact cardio­ vascular disease have been proposed, such as
progression of atherosclerosis, systemic inflammation, and alterations
in immune function. Evidence for such mechanistic pathways exists in
both the toxicology and epidemiology litera­ ture. Studies of
apolipoprotein  E--deficient

195

Madrigano et al.

(ApoE--/--) mice have linked exposure to concentrated air particles over
4--6 months with increased aortic atherosclerotic plaque (Chen and
Nadziejko 2005). A more recent study of low density lipoprotein
receptor--deficient (LDLR--/--) mice demonstrated that particle exposure
increased oxidation of LDL, increased the thickness of the arterial
wall, and promoted plaque growth and instability (Soares et al. 2009).
In humans, long-term exposure to PM2.5 has been associated with
increased carotid intima media thickness, a subclinical marker of
coronary atherosclerosis, in two cross-­­sectional studies in the United
States (Diez Roux et al. 2008; Künzli et al. 2005) and one in Germany
(Bauer et al. 2010). Other studies have also reported associations of
particles with various markers of chronic athero­sclerosis (Adar et al.
2010; Allen et al. 2009). These studies suggest that our findings of an
association between long-term exposure to PM2.5 and occurrence of AMI
are biologically plausible. In the present population-based study, we
observed an association between AMI and PM2.5 exposure. However, this
study is not without limitations, and therefore these findings should be
interpreted with caution. Because our exposure varied spatially, we
included other spatially varying covariates that also predicted AMI,
such as percent of households living in poverty, distance to large
super­markets, and distance to recreation areas, in our models. However,
these measures do not perfectly account for individual-level AMI risk
factors (e.g., smoking, dietary patterns, physical activity) that also
vary spatially, and therefore could be a source of unmeasured
confounding in our models. We attempted to account for this by running
models that included an exchangeable correlation structure within census
block groups and census tracts, which did not change results
substantially. Nonetheless, some residual confounding by socio­economic
and lifestyle factors is likely. Associations varied, somewhat, by
section of the study area, which may be a function of varying exposure
and residual confounding. Our PM2.5 prediction models have a relatively
coarse spatial resolution (10 × 10 km), which may have led to some error
in characterizing area-level exposure. Although estimation conducted at
a finer spatial resolution is preferable, the ability to capture
background area PM2.5 and still account for local PM2.5 by the separate
covariate was an advantage of this study. Models used to predict
exposures were also limited by a lack of data on the exact composition
of AOD particles. In addition, our model predicted ambient PM2.5
exposure at a subject's residential location, without accounting for the
amount of time spent in other locations, indoors versus outdoors, or the
length of residence at the current address. Finally, our area PM2.5
exposure metric was approximated from the year 2000 annual exposure for
the

196

study area. This year was selected based on AOD data availability and
because it was within the study period of case accrual. Because our
cases were accrued before and after this date, we do not expect
differential exposure error in the cases, but it is possible that there
is some differential exposure misclassification with respect to
residential history for the controls. When we stratified by study time
period, the OR for the area PM2.5 estimate was greater during the later
time period. Because controls were sampled by proxy from resident lists
in 2003 to represent the study base over the entire study period,
exposure estimates for controls in the earlier time periods may have
been higher than the actual exposure for these subjects, leading to a
downward bias of our results.

Conclusions After accounting for local pollution exposure, long-term
exposure to area PM2.5 was associated with the occurrence of AMI in this
population-­based study. The association between total PM2.5 and AMI
occurrence was weaker, but this metric of combined spatial scales may
provide a better estimate of total PM2.5 exposure at an individual's
residence. This study adds to the growing body of literature on
long-term regional particulate pollution and cardiovascular morbidity,
and highlights the importance of examining pollut­ant variability within
a single metropolitan area, rather than solely focusing on ­comparisons
across large spatial scales. References Adar SD, Klein R, Klein BE,
Szpiro AA, Cotch MF, Wong TY, et al. 2010. Air pollution and the
microvasculature: a cross-­sectional assessment of in vivo retinal
images in the ­population-based Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis
(MESA). PLoS Med 7(11):e1000372; doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000372
[Online 30 November 2010]. Allen RW, Criqui MH, Diez Roux AV, Allison M,
Shea S, Detrano R, et al. 2009. Fine particulate matter air pollution,
proximity to traffic, and aortic atherosclerosis. Epidemiology
20(2):254--264. Bauer M, Moebus S, Mohlenkamp S, Dragano N,
Nonnemacher M, Fuchsluger M, et al. 2010. Urban particulate matter air
pol­ lution is associated with subclinical atherosclerosis: results from
the HNR (Heinz Nixdorf Recall) study. J Am Coll Cardiol
56(22):1803--1808. Bhaskaran K, Hajat S, Haines A, Herrett E, Wilkinson
P, Smeeth L. 2009. Effects of air pollution on the incidence of
myocardial infarction. Heart 95(21):1746--1759. Brochu PJ, Yanosky JD,
Paciorek CJ, Schwartz J, Chen JT, Herrick RF, et al. 2011. Particulate
air pollution and socio­economic position in rural and urban areas of
the northeastern United States. Am J Public Health 101(suppl
1):S224--S230. Brownson RC, Baker EA, Housemann RA, Brennan LK,
Bacak SJ. 2001. Environmental and policy determinants of physical
activity in the United States. Am J Public Health 91(12):1995--2003.
Chen LC, Nadziejko C. 2005. Effects of subchronic exposures to
concentrated ambient particles (CAPs) in mice. V. CAPs exacerbate aortic
plaque development in hyperlipidemic mice. Inhal Toxicol
17(4--5):217--224. Diez Roux AV, Auchincloss AH, Franklin TG,
Raghunathan T, Barr RG, Kaufman J, et al. 2008. Long-term exposure to
ambient particulate matter and prevalence of subclinical atherosclerosis
in the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol
167(6):667--675. Dockery DW, Pope CA III, Xu X, Spengler JD, Ware JH,
Fay ME,

volume

et al. 1993. An association between air pollution and mor­ tality in six
U.S. cities. N Engl J Med 329(24):1753--1759. Floyd KC, Yarzebski J,
Spencer FA, Lessard D, Dalen JE, Alpert JS, et al. 2009. A 30-year
perspective (1975--2005) into the changing landscape of patients
hospitalized with initial acute myocardial infarction: Worcester Heart
Attack Study. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2(2):88--95. Goldberg RJ,
Gore JM, Alpert JS, Dalen JE. 1988. Incidence and case fatality rates of
acute myocardial infarction (1975--1984): the Worcester Heart Attack
Study. Am Heart J 115(4):761--767. Goldberg RJ, Yarzebski J, Lessard D,
Gore JM. 1999. A twodecades (1975 to 1995) long experience in the
incidence, in-hospital and long-term case-fatality rates of acute myo­
cardial infarction: a community-wide perspective. J Am Coll Cardiol
33(6):1533--1539. Hoek G, Brunekreef B, Goldbohm S, Fischer P, van den
Brandt PA. 2002. Association between mortality and indicators of
trafficrelated air pollution in the Netherlands: a cohort study. Lancet
360(9341):1203--1209. Jerrett M, Burnett RT, Ma R, Pope CA III, Krewski
D, Newbold KB, et al. 2005. Spatial analysis of air pollution and
mortality in Los Angeles. Epidemiology 16(6):727--736. Kloog I,
Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J. 2011. Assessing temporally
and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological studies using
satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos Environ
45(35):6267--6275. Krewski D, Jerrett M, Burnett RT, Ma R, Hughes E, Shi
Y, et al. 2009. Extended follow-up and spatial analysis of the American
Cancer Society study linking particulate air pollu­ tion and mortality.
Res Rep Health Eff Inst (140):5--114. Krieger N, Chen JT, Waterman PD,
Soobader MJ, Subramanian SV, Carson R. 2002. Geocoding and monitoring of
US socio­economic inequalities in mortality and cancer incidence: Does
the choice of area-based measure and geographic level matter? The Public
Health Disparities Geo­ coding Project. Am J Epidemiol 156(5):471--482.
Künzli N, Jerrett M, Mack WJ, Beckerman B, LaBree L, Gilliland F, et al.
2005. Ambient air pollution and athero­sclerosis in Los Angeles. Environ
Health Perspect 113:201--206. MassGIS. 2012. MassGIS Data---Protected
and Recreational Open Space. Available: http://www.mass.gov/mgis/
[accessed 2 March 2012]. Michimi A, Wimberly MC. 2010. Associations of
supermarket accessibility with obesity and fruit and vegetable consump­
tion in the conterminous United States. Int J Health Geogr 9:49;
doi:10.1186/1476-072X-9-49 [Online 8 October 2010]. Miller KA, Siscovick
DS, Sheppard L, Shepherd K, Sullivan JH, Anderson GL, et al. 2007.
Long-term exposure to air pollution and incidence of cardiovascular
events in women. N Engl J Med 356(5):447--458. Pope CA III, Burnett RT,
Thurston GD, Thun MJ, Calle EE, Krewski D, et al. 2004. Cardiovascular
mortality and longterm exposure to particulate air pollution:
epidemiological evidence of general pathophysiological pathways of
disease. Circulation 109(1):71--77. Puett RC, Hart JE, Yanosky JD,
Paciorek C, Schwartz J, Suh H, et al. 2009. Chronic fine and coarse
particulate exposure, mortality, and coronary heart disease in the
Nurses' Health Study. Environ Health Perspect 117:1697--1701. Soares SR,
Carvalho-Oliveira R, Ramos-Sanchez E, Catanozi S, da Silva LF, Mauad T,
et al. 2009. Air pollution and anti­ bodies against modified
lipoproteins are associated with atherosclerosis and vascular remodeling
in hyper­lipidemic mice. Atherosclerosis 207(2):368--373. Tonne C, Melly
S, Mittleman M, Coull B, Goldberg R, Schwartz J. 2007. A case--control
analysis of exposure to traffic and acute myocardial infarction. Environ
Health Perspect 115:53--57. Tonne C, Yanosky J, Gryparis A, Melly S,
Mittleman M, Goldberg R, et al. 2009. Traffic particles and occurrence
of acute myocardial infarction: a case-control analysis. Occup Environ
Med 66(12):797--804. U.S. Census Bureau. 2000a. Cartographic Boundary
Files. Available: https://www.census.gov/geo/www/cob/bg\_ metadata.html
[accessed 20 December 2012]. U.S. Census Bureau. 2000b. American
FactFinder. Available:
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index. xhtml [accessed
18 December 2012]. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2009.
Integrated Science Assessment for Particulate Matter (Final Report).
EPA/600/R-08/139F. Research Triangle Park, NC:U.S. EPA. Available:
http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/CFM/recordisplay. cfm?deid=216546 [accessed
18 December 2012].

121 | number 2 | February 2013  •  Environmental Health Perspectives


