Associations between Changes in City and Address Specific Temperature
and QT Interval - The VA Normative Aging Study Amar J. Mehta1*, Itai
Kloog1,2, Antonella Zanobetti1, Brent A. Coull3, David Sparrow4,5,6,
Pantel Vokonas4,6, Joel Schwartz1,5 1 Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America, 2 The
Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3 Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America, 4 The VA Normative Aging Study, Veterans
Affairs Boston Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
of America, 5 The Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America,
6 Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America

Abstract Background: The underlying mechanisms of the association
between ambient temperature and cardiovascular morbidity and mortality
are not well understood, particularly for daily temperature variability.
We evaluated if daily mean temperature and standard deviation of
temperature was associated with heart rate-corrected QT interval (QTc)
duration, a marker of ventricular repolarization in a prospective cohort
of older men. Methods: This longitudinal analysis included 487 older men
participating in the VA Normative Aging Study with up to three visits
between 2000--2008 (n = 743). We analyzed associations between QTc and
moving averages (1--7, 14, 21, and 28 days) of the 24-hour mean and
standard deviation of temperature as measured from a local weather
monitor, and the 24-hour mean temperature estimated from a
spatiotemporal prediction model, in time-varying linear mixed-effect
regression. Effect modification by season, diabetes, coronary heart
disease, obesity, and age was also evaluated. Results: Higher mean
temperature as measured from the local monitor, and estimated from the
prediction model, was associated with longer QTc at moving averages of
21 and 28 days. Increased 24-hr standard deviation of temperature was
associated with longer QTc at moving averages from 4 and up to 28 days;
a 1.9uC interquartile range increase in 4-day moving average standard
deviation of temperature was associated with a 2.8 msec (95%CI: 0.4,
5.2) longer QTc. Associations between 24-hr standard deviation of
temperature and QTc were stronger in colder months, and in participants
with diabetes and coronary heart disease. Conclusion/Significance: In
this sample of older men, elevated mean temperature was associated with
longer QTc, and increased variability of temperature was associated with
longer QTc, particularly during colder months and among individuals with
diabetes and coronary heart disease. These findings may offer insight of
an important underlying mechanism of temperature-related cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality in an older population. Citation: Mehta AJ,
Kloog I, Zanobetti A, Coull BA, Sparrow D, et al. (2014) Associations
between Changes in City and Address Specific Temperature and QT Interval
- The VA Normative Aging Study. PLoS ONE 9(9): e106258.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0106258 Editor: Mathias Baumert, University of
Adelaide, Australia Received November 27, 2013; Accepted August 4, 2014;
Published September 19, 2014 Copyright: ß 2014 Mehta et al. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are
credited. Funding: This work was supported by grants from the National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (ES014663-01A2,
2RO1-ES015172, ES014663, ES00002, and EPA Clean Air Research Center
grant RD83479701/). The Veterans Affairs (VA) Normative Aging Study is
supported by the Cooperative Studies Program/ Epidemiology Research and
Information Center of the US Department of Veterans Affairs and is a
component of the Massachusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and
Information Center, Boston, Massachusetts. Support was also provided by
a VA Research Career Scientist award (to AS) and by National Institutes
of Health grants R01-AG002287, R01-AG018436, and R29-AG007465. This
research was also supported by a VA Research Career Scientist award to
David Sparrow. The funders had no role in study design, data collection
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. /
This publication's contents are solely the responsibility of the grantee
and do not necessarily represent the official views of the US EPA.
Further, US EPA does not endorse the purchase of any commercial products
or services mentioned in the publication. Competing Interests: The
authors have declared that no competing interests exist. * Email:
amehta@hsph.harvard.edu

related mortality [3--6]. While the highest risk of heat-related
mortality is for mean temperature measured within 24-hours and up to 3
days before event [1,3,7], cold effects on mortality continue longer. In
general there is limited evidence demonstrating risk of mortality
associated with changes in daily mean temperature averaged over longer
intervals (e.g. between 7 and 40 days) [1,8]. Recent studies also
demonstrate that variability of and large

Introduction It is well established that increases and decreases in
ambient mean temperatures are associated with mortality [1,2], and that
elderly age, chronic disease including cardiovascular disease and
diabetes mellitus, mental illness, sociodemographic characteristics, and
social isolation may heighten susceptibility to temperature-

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

1

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258

Outdoor Temperature and QT Interval

changes in the daily mean temperature averaged over shorter and longer
intervals are also associated with mortality [9--12]. Finally, most
epidemiologic studies to date have used a single value for a city to
characterize exposure, which ignore important differences that may
influence temperature at individual residences including urban heat
islands, distance from water, and amount of impermeable surface [13].
There are clear physiological mechanisms for the association of extreme
heat or cold with mortality, particularly the reduced ability to
regulate core temperature [3]. However, the underlying biological
mechanisms behind the associations observed between mean temperature and
mortality under more moderate conditions, and over longer intervals, are
not well understood, and may be distinct from those associated with mean
temperature and mortality under more severe conditions and shorter
intervals. Understanding these mechanisms, especially in vulnerable
populations, may lead to more focused intervention measures and improved
risk assessment. Previous research has demonstrated associations between
mean temperature, averaged over shorter and longer intervals, and
markers of inflammation [14--16], hemodynamics [17--18], and cardiac
autonomic function [19--23], which suggests that these pathways may be
potential mechanisms of mean temperature-related cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality. It also hypothesized by Hampel and colleagues
[24] that ambient mean temperature may affect repolarization, including
QT interval and T-wave abnormalities, which are associated with
arrhythmic events and cardiovascular mortality [25--28]. A previous
study conducted within a subset of myocardial infarction survivors of
the KORA cohort in Augsburg, Germany observed a U-shape association
between ambient mean temperature and Twave amplitude, at all lags
between 0 and 5 days, with the highest T-wave amplitude at 5uC [24]. In
the same study, investigators did not identify any association between
mean temperature and QTc. Whether changes in mean temperature averaged
over longer time periods affects QTc is not known. Additionally, very
little is known of the underlying mechanisms that may explain the
association between morbidity and mortality associated with temperature
variability. It is hypothesized that increased temperature variability
may stress the ability of the thermoregulation system to adapt to sudden
and extreme temperature changes, and that adaptive ability is reduced in
individuals who are immunocompromised or present with chronic illness
[29]. For this study, we evaluated if changes in the daily mean
temperature, and the daily standard deviation of temperature, were
associated with heart-rate corrected QT interval (QTc) in a cohort of
elderly males in the Boston Metropolitan Area. Additionally, we applied
a validated spatially and temporally resolved prediction model utilizing
satellite surface temperature data [13] to estimate daily air
temperature at the participant's home address, and compared associations
for daily mean temperature measured from a local weather monitor and
estimated from the predicted model.

Study population and design Participants included in this analysis were
enrolled in the Veteran Affairs Normative Aging Study (NAS), an ongoing
longitudinal study of aging established in 1963, details of which have
been published previously [30]. Briefly, the NAS is a closed cohort of
2,280 male volunteers from the Greater Boston area aged 21--80 years at
entry, who were enrolled after an initial health screening determined
that they were free of known chronic medical conditions. The men have
been reevaluated every 3 to 5 years by using detailed on-site physical
examinations and questionnaires. Dropout has been less than 1% per year
in this cohort and predominantly occurs when participants move out of
the study area. The other major reason for loss to follow-up has been
mortality. From November 2000 to December 2008, there were 694
participants who underwent electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring, from whom
580 individuals have valid QT measurements at one or more visits to give
a total of 926 QT measurements. We excluded 14 participants with
incomplete information on relevant covariates, 42 participants with
incomplete address history for estimating temperature from the
spatiotemporal model, and 37 participants with pacemakers or ECGs
indicating atrial fibrillation, leaving a total of 743 measurements from
487 participants. For the purpose of this analysis, the term ‘baseline
visit' refers to the first visit when QT was measured.

ECG measurement and analysis The ECG was recorded at the exam site (VA
Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA) for 5 to 10 min between 0530 and
1400 hours with a two-channel (five lead) ECG monitor (Trillium 3000;
Forest Medical, Inc., East Syracuse, NY) using a sampling rate of 256 Hz
per channel. A detailed description of the protocol is provided
elsewhere [31,32]. The electrocardiogram digital recordings were
processed using personal computer-based software (Trillium Platinum
Holter Analysis Software for MS Windows; Forest Medical) to create a
Mathcad (Parametric Technology Corporation, Needham, Massachusetts) file
containing QT interval measurements. A Win32 console application
(Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Washington) was used to obtain QT and
QTc values from the data. This application measured the QT interval from
the beat onset to the end of the T wave only on normal or
supraventricular beats and calculated the QTc value in milliseconds
(msec) using Bazett's formula as described by Bednar et al. [33]. The QT
interval was not calculated if the T wave did not have sufficient
amplitude, as determined by the program algorithm. The Intraclass
correlation coefficient for mean QTc across all visits was 0.65,
indicating moderate agreement.

Meterology, pollution, and spatiotemporal assessment of temperature
Hourly temperature and humidity data were obtained from a stationary
monitor located at the Boston Logan airport weather station (12 km from
the exam site), and we calculated the 24-hour mean and standard
deviation of temperature for each calendar day in the study period. For
this analysis, we evaluated moving average windows of 24-hr mean
temperature and 24-hr standard deviation of temperature of 1 and up to 7
days prior to visit, as well as 14, 21, and 28 days prior to visit.
Ambient particulate pollutant concentrations were monitored at our
Harvard Air Pollution Supersite located near downtown Boston 1 km from
the exam site, and for the present analysis we considered evaluation of
4-hour lag black carbon (BC) exposure

Materials and Methods Ethics Statement The present study was approved by
the Human Research Committees of the Harvard School of Public Health and
the Department of Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System, and written
informed consent was obtained from participants prior to participation.

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

2

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258

Outdoor Temperature and QT Interval

race (black, white as reference), and years of education, and of
time-varying characteristics that were ascertained at each visit
including years since baseline visit, body mass index (bmi) (kg/m2),
total cholesterol (mg/dL), mean arterial pressure (mmHg), diabetes
status (physician's diagnosed diabetes or fasting blood glucose.126
mg/dL [yes, no as reference]), QT prolonging medication including
beta-blockers (yes, no as reference), percent of census tract $25 years
of age without high school diploma, percent of census tract that is
non-white, alcohol consumption ($2 drinks/day, ,2 drinks/day as
reference), smoking status (current, former, never as reference), day of
week, seasonality (using sine and cosine), 24-hour mean relative
humidity, and 4-hour lag BC concentration (mg/m3). To identify
QT-prolonging medications, we considered drugs grouped by risk of
torsades and possible risk of torsades from the Arizona Center for
Education and Research on Therapeutics [36]. The above covariates were
chosen a priori as potential confounders or important determinants of
QTc. We investigated possible effect modification by season (warm:
April-- September; cold: October-March), obesity (bmi$30 kg/m2), age,
diabetes, and coronary heart disease, by adding an interaction term for
the temperature and modifier variables to the models. Two-sided
p-values#0.05 were interpreted as statistically significant for main and
interaction terms. In a preliminary analysis, we evaluated whether the
association between the moving average of each temperature variable and
QTc was non-linear. We fit generalized additive mixed models with
penalized splines for each of the temperature variables. The generalized
cross validation criterion of the model was used to determine the
degrees of freedom of the spline for the nonlinear term, and we compared
the Akaike information criterion to assess model fit between models with
the linear and non-linear term. For all models, the linear term for each
of the temperature variables was the better fit. Similarly, we fit
penalized splines for years since baseline visit, age at baseline visit,
body mass index, mean arterial pressure and total cholesterol one at a
time in generalized additive mixed models to evaluate whether the
association between these covariates and QTc were non-linear. The linear
term for each of these covariates was the better fit.

prior to visit, which was identified as a significant predictor of QTc
in a previous analysis [34]. Hourly BC concentrations were measured
using an Aethalometer (Magee Scientific Company, Model AE-16, Berkeley,
CA). BC is associated with traffic emissions especially those related to
diesel fuel combustion. Predicted air temperature exposure data were
generated by using a novel air temperature spatiotemporal prediction
model [13]. Our air temperature predictions are generated by a series of
statistical models. In brief, we start by using a mixed model approach
to calibrate daily MODIS surface temperature in each grid cell where
both air temperature and surface temperature values within 1 km are
available on that day. This model is fit by regressing monitored air
temperature against surface temperature with additional air temperature
predictors (percent urban, elevation, normalized difference vegetation
index) as well as a random intercept and a random slope for surface
temperature for each day. Since surface temperature values are often
missing due to cloud cover or retrieval errors, the base model often
fails to provide predictions for many grid cell-day combinations. To
estimate air temperature when no surface temperature data are available,
we fit an additional model that takes advantage of the association of
grid cells surface temperature values with air temperature monitoring
located elsewhere and the association with surface temperature values in
neighboring grid cells. Importantly, since daily air temperature varies
considerably between different geographical regions, we built a 60 km
buffer around each monitor and used its daily temperature as a predictor
of temperature in all cells that fell within the buffer. Out-of-sample
‘‘ten-fold'' cross-validation was used to quantify the accuracy of our
predictions. Our model performance was excellent for both days with
available satellite data and days without satellite observations (mean
out-of-sample R2 = 0.947 and R2 = 0.940, respectively). To estimate air
temperature exposure at each participant's residence, we linked each
participant's residence to the corresponding model 161 km grid cell in
which it fell. When we regressed monitored temperature as a function of
predicted temperature for the monitors within 150 km of Boston that were
left out from the analysis, the calculated root mean square predicted
error (RMSPE) was 1.48. In contrast when we calculated the RMSPE by
using the Logan weather station (i.e. local monitor) readings, the RMSPE
was 2.3, almost a full degree difference. This contrast demonstrates the
improved accuracy of spatially resolved temperature estimates from our
models for NAS participants living further from central Boston. Similar
to 24-hr mean temperature measured from the local monitor, we evaluated
moving average windows of the 24-hr mean temperature estimated from the
prediction model at 1 and up to 7 days prior to visit, as well as 14,
21, and 28 days prior to visit.

Secondary analysis Of the 487 participants included in this analysis,
290 (59.7%) did not participate in a subsequent follow-up visit. Because
healthier men may be more likely to participate in subsequent follow-up
visits, we applied inverse probability weights to correct for this
potential survival bias as a sensitivity analysis [37]. Similar to
methods described by Zanobetti et al. [38], we used logistic regression
to calculate the probability of having a second and third subsequent
follow-up visit given the following factors at the previous visit: age,
body mass index, smoking status and packyears, hypertension, cholesterol
and diabetes. We then used the inverse of these predicted probabilities
as the weights for those person-visits in the linear mixed-effect
models. The inverse probability weight for all participants at the
baseline visit was ‘1'.

Statistical analysis All statistical analyses were carried out using SAS
Version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and R (R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). We used linear mixed-effects
regression (PROC MIXED) with random participant-specific intercepts,
accounting for the correlation of repeated QTc measures across time
points [35], to model mean QTc as a continuous function of moving
average of 24-hr mean temperature measured from the local monitor, 24-hr
mean temperature estimated from the predictive model, and 24-hr standard
deviation of temperature. Estimates are given per interquartile range of
the temperature variable for the specific moving average. In separate
models, we fit each moving average window of each temperature variable
one at a time in an established confounder model consisting of fixed
characteristics including age at baseline visit, PLOS ONE |
www.plosone.org

Results The 487 participants included in this analysis had a total of
one (n = 290), two (n = 138), or three (n = 59) separate visits with
valid QTc measurements (Table 1). The mean age at baseline visit when
QTc was measured was approximately 74 years. The mean QTc measured at
the baseline visit approximated 392 msec. The distributions of QTc
measured in all visits during warm (Mean (SD): 390.7 msec (24.6)) and
cold (Mean (SD): 391.4 msec (26.0))

3

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258

Outdoor Temperature and QT Interval

Table 1. Characteristics of study participants at first visit, the VA
Normative Aging Study, November 2000 to December 2008.

Characteristics

n (%)

Physician diagnosed Diabetes Mellitus or fasting blood glucose.126 mg/dL

92 (18.9)

Coronary heart disease

133 (27.3)

Hypertension

342 (70.2)

Use of QT prolonging medication

180 (36.9)

Obesity BMI$30 kg/m2

118 (24.2)

BMI,30 kg/m2

369 (75.8)

Race Black

13 (2.7)

White

474 (97.3)

Alcohol consumption (drinks/day) $2

93 (19.1)

,2

393 (80.9)

Smoking status Former

329 (67.6)

Current

23 (4.7)

Never

135 (27.7)

Number of visits with QTc measured

75 (20.3)

One

290 (59.7)

Two

138 (28.3)

Three

59 (12.1) Mean (SD)

QTc, msec

391.7 (26.2)

Age, years

73.6 (6.7)

Body mass index, kg/m2

27.9 (4.0)

Total cholesterol, mg/dL

191.2 (36.9)

Mean arterial pressure, mmHg

92.4 (11.0)

Maximum years of education

15.0 (3.0)

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0106258.t001

28-day moving average of 24-hr mean temperature were associated with a
10.4 msec (95%CI: 0.9, 19.8) and 12.6 msec (95%CI: 2.4, 22.9) longer
QTc, respectively. Across all moving averages, the standard errors for
the associations between 24-hr mean temperature and QTc were smaller
when utilizing the spatiotemporal predictive model rather than
measurements from the local monitor. While marginally statistically
significant associations (p,0.10) were observed between higher 14-day
moving average of 24-hr mean temperature and longer QTc utilizing both
approaches for estimating mean temperature, no associations were
observed for 24-hr mean temperature at shorter moving average windows
between 1 and 7 days. Statistically significant associations were also
observed between 24-hr standard deviation of temperature and QTc from
moving averages of 4 days up to 28 days (Figure 1b). A 1.9uC IQR
increase in the 4-day moving average 24-hr standard deviation of
temperature was associated with a 2.8 msec (95%CI: 0.4, 5.2) longer QTc.
The strongest associations between higher 24-hr standard deviation of
temperature and longer QTc was observed at the 28-day moving average; a
0.5uC IQR increase in the 28-day moving average of 24-hr standard
deviation of temperature was associated with a 4.7 msec (95%CI: 2.2,
7.3) longer QTc.

months closely approximated each other. Participants were predominantly
white, former smokers, and hypertensive. Table 2 summarizes the
distribution of the meteorology and pollution parameters and
correlations between them in all personvisits included in this analysis.
24-hr mean temperature as measured from the local monitor and as
estimated from the spatiotemporal predictive model closely approximated
each other, and as expected, a very strong positive correlation was also
observed. Weaker correlations were observed between both 24hour mean
temperature variables with 24-hour mean relative humidity, 4-hour lag
BC, and 24-hr standard deviation of temperature. Higher 24-hr mean
temperature, as measured from the local monitor, was significantly
associated with longer QTc at moving averages of 21 and 28 days (Figure
1a). Specifically, interquartile range (IQR) increases in 21-day
(15.1uC) and 28-day (15.2uC) moving average of 24-hr mean temperature
measured from the local monitor was associated with a 17.0 msec (95%CI:
4.5--29.4) and 23.1 msec (95%CI: 9.0--37.2) longer QTc, respectively.
While significant associations were present at the same moving averages
for 24-hr mean temperature estimated from the spatiotemporal predictive
model, the effect sizes were moderately smaller in comparison (Figure
1a); 8.4uC and 8.5uC IQR increases in 21 and

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

4

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258

0.5 (0.3, 0.9)

11.4 (5.4)

0.7 (0.5) 4-hr lag BC, mg/m3

2.3 (1.5, 3.0)

11.5 (7.3, 15.8)

2.4 (1.2)

24-hr TP, uC

24-hr TSDL, uC

66.5 (54.3, 77.9) 66.5 (15.2) 24-hr RH,%

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

Abbreviations: SD -- standard deviation; IQR -- interquartile range;
24-hr TL -- 24-hour mean temperature measured from local weather
monitor; 24-hr RH -- 24-hour mean relative humidity measured from local
weather monitor; 24hr TSDL -- 24-hr standard deviation of temperature
measured from local weather monitor; 24-hr TP -- 24-hour mean
temperature measured from prediction model; BC -- 4-hour lag black
carbon measured from central monitoring site.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0106258.t002

0.23

20.05

1.00

1.00

0.11 1.00

0.12 0.20 20.34 1.00

4-hr lag BC

0.19 0.94

24-hr TP 24-hr TSDS

0.24 0.12

24-hr RH 24-hr TS Median (IQR)

11.6 (4.0, 18.8) 11.5 (9.0) 24-hr TL, uC

Mean (SD)

1.00

r Summary Statistics

Table 2. Summary statistics and Pearson Correlation Coefficients of
meteorologic and black carbon measurements at all visits (n = 743), the
VA Normative Aging Study, November 2000 to December 2008.

Outdoor Temperature and QT Interval

As part of a sensitivity analysis, no considerable changes in the
associations between 24-hr mean temperature and 24-hr standard deviation
of temperature and QTc, as shown in Figures 1a and 1b, were observed
after inverse probability weights were applied (data not shown).
Additionally, there were no appreciable changes in the effect estimates
or standard errors for moving average 24-hr mean temperature in
minimally adjusted linear mixed-effect models that retained a reduced
set of covariates including age at baseline visit, seasonality, 24-hr
mean relative humidity, and 4-hr lag black carbon concentration in the
models (Table S1). However, marginally stronger positive associations
with wider standard errors were observed for 24-hr standard deviation of
temperature at moving averages of 14, 21, and 28 days, in the minimally
adjusted model in comparison with the effect estimates shown in Figure
1b (Table S1). At moving averages of 14, 21, and 28 days, the
associations between 24-hr mean temperature, as measured from the local
monitor, and QTc as shown in Figure 1a were slightly stronger during
warm than cold months (Figure 2a). However, the confidence intervals for
the estimated associations for warm and cold months widely overlapped,
and effect modification by season was not statistically significant. A
similar pattern in comparing estimated associations between warm and
cold months was observed for 24-hr mean temperature predicted from the
spatiotemporal model (Figures S1a in File S1). In contrast, stronger
associations were observed between 24-hr standard deviation of
temperature and QTc in cold than warm months (Figure 2b). The
statistically significant associations between elevated 24-hr standard
deviation of temperature and longer QTc at moving average windows
between 4 and 7 days, as shown in Figure 1b, were observed only in cold
months. Effect modification by season on the association between 24-hr
standard deviation of temperature and QTc was statistically significant
at moving averages of 6 (pinteraction = 0.05) and 7 days (pinteraction =
0.04). Estimated associations between 24-hr mean temperature and 24-hr
standard deviation of temperature, as measured from the local monitor,
and QTc by subgroup according to individual-level characteristics,
including age $74 years, obesity, coronary heart disease, and diabetes,
are presented in Figures 3 and 4. Significant effect modification by age
$74 years, obesity, coronary heart disease, and diabetes, on the
associations between 24-hr mean temperature and QTc at moving averages
of 14, 21, and 28 days, was not observed. A similar pattern in comparing
estimated associations between subgroup categories was observed for
24-hr mean temperature predicted from the spatiotemporal model (S1bS1e
in File S1). Across moving averages of 4 and up to 28 days, the positive
associations between higher 24-hr standard deviation of temperature and
longer QTc were more pronounced among participants with diabetes and
coronary heart disease, and there was significant effect modification
observed by diabetes at a moving average of 21 days (pinteraction =
0.02, Figure 4a) and by coronary heart disease at moving averages of 21
(pinteraction = 0.05, Figure 4b) and 28 days (pinteraction = 0.02,
Figure 4b).

Discussion In this sample of predominantly older white men, we observed
that higher daily mean temperature was associated with longer QTc,
specifically at longer moving average windows of 21 and 28 days while no
associations were observed at shorter moving averages. In contrast,
increased daily standard deviation of temperature was associated with
longer QTc at both shorter and longer averaging moving averages,
spanning from 4 and up to 28 5

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258

Outdoor Temperature and QT Interval

Figure 1. Associations between QTc and 1 interquartile range increase of
moving average 24-hr mean temperature measured from local monitor or
estimated from predictive model (1a) and 24-hr standard deviation of
temperature measured from local monitor (1b). Associations were
estimated in linear mixed-effect regression models with random intercept
for study participant and adjusted for years since baseline visit, age
at baseline visit, race, body mass index, total cholesterol, mean
arterial pressure, diabetes, QT prolonging medication, years of
education, percent of census tract $25 years of age without high school
diploma, percent of census tract that is non-white, alcohol consumption,
smoking status, day of week, seasonality, 24-hour mean relative
humidity, and 4-hour lag black carbon concentration.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0106258.g001

days, particularly in the colder months for shorter moving averages and
in individuals with diabetes and coronary heart disease at longer moving
averages. Consistent with the previous study in the subset of myocardial
infarction survivors of the KORA cohort [24], we did not observe any
association between mean temperature and QT interval at moving averages
of 1 to 7 days. Previous studies to date have not examined daily
temperature variability in association with QTc. The associations
between higher 24-hr standard deviation of temperature and longer QTc at
moving averages of 4 to 7 days, as shown in Figure 1b, were similar in
magnitude even after adjustment for corresponding moving average of
24-hr mean

temperature (data not shown), suggesting that the variability of
temperature, rather than the mean temperature, averaged over shorter
time periods may be more relevant for changes in QTc. An alternative
explanation for absence of association between QTc and 24-hr mean
temperature averaged over a shorter time period is that there may be
less exposure measurement error of mean temperature with longer
averaging times than with shorter averaging times. Non-linear
associations including J-, V-, or U-shaped associations between
temperature and mortality have also been observed previously [1,39,40],
and in our preliminary analysis of the present study we did not observe
non-linear associations between

Figure 2. Associations between QTc and 1 interquartile range increase of
moving average 24-hr mean temperature (2a) and 24-hr standard deviation
of temperature (2b) measured from local monitor by season. Associations
were estimated in linear mixed-effect regression models with random
intercept for study participant and adjusted for years since baseline
visit, age at baseline visit, race, body mass index, total cholesterol,
mean arterial pressure, diabetes, QT prolonging medication, years of
education, percent of census tract $25 years of age without high school
diploma, percent of census tract that is non-white, alcohol consumption,
smoking status, day of week, seasonality, 24-hour mean relative
humidity, and 4-hour lag black carbon concentration; associations
between moving average temperature variable and QTc for warmer months
and colder months were estimated from interaction models.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0106258.g002

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

6

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258

Outdoor Temperature and QT Interval

Figure 3. Associations between QTc and 1 interquartile range increase of
moving average 24-hr mean temperature measured from local monitor
estimated in subgroups defined by diabetes (3a), coronary heart disease
(3b), obesity (3c), and age (3d). Associations were estimated in linear
mixed-effect regression models with random intercept for study
participant and adjusted for years since baseline visit, age at baseline
visit, race, body mass index, total cholesterol, mean arterial pressure,
diabetes, QT prolonging medication, years of education, percent of
census tract $25 years of age without high school diploma, percent of
census tract that is non-white, alcohol consumption, smoking status, day
of week, seasonality, 24-hour mean relative humidity, and 4-hour lag
black carbon concentration; associations between moving average 24-hr
mean temperature and QTc in each subgroup were estimated from
interaction models. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0106258.g003

temperature and QTc. Additionally, a previous analysis in the VA
Normative Aging Study did not identify any evidence of a nonlinear
association between apparent temperature and heart rate variability
[21]. Similarly, the previous study conducted within the KORA cohort did
not find evidence for a deviation of linearity of the association
between temperature and QTc [24]. The underlying biological mechanism(s)
that may explain the association between temperature and QTc is not
known. A previous analysis of the Normative Aging Study showed that
14day moving averages of daily mean apparent temperature were associated
with reduced heart rate variability, a marker of cardiac autonomic
dysfunction, during warm months [21]. There is also observational
evidence to support the association between reduced heart rate
variability and autonomic dysfunction with prolonged QT interval
[41--44]. Taking these findings together, we hypothesize that the
association between mean temperature and QTc may be mediated by
autonomic dysfunction. A main advantage of the present study was the
ability to compare associations between moving average of 24-hr mean
temperature and QTc utilizing the local monitor and the spatiotemporal
predictive model using satellite data. However, PLOS ONE |
www.plosone.org

very little difference was observed between the two methods at the
shorter moving averages, suggesting that geographical differences do not
explain much of the variation in QTc in response to daily mean
temperature. While more divergence in the estimated associations between
the two methods was observed at the longer moving average windows, this
may be an artifact of larger variation in mean temperature measured from
the fixed monitor compared with the spatiotemporal predictive model.
Additionally, the standard errors of the estimated associations for
moving average of 24-hr mean temperature were reduced when utilizing the
spatiotemporal predictive model, suggesting that utilizing measurements
of daily mean temperature from a single site may result in Berkson
measurement error, which has been observed more commonly with air
pollution [45], rather than classical exposure measurement error. This
study has a number of strengths including prospective design,
spatiotemporal assessment of mean temperature, methods to address
selection bias, and adjustment for multiple confounders, but there are
several limitations that should be considered. The 24-hour mean
temperature as predicted from the model is based on daily MODIS surface
temperature rather than hourly estimates 7

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258

Outdoor Temperature and QT Interval

Figure 4. Associations between QTc and 1 interquartile range increase of
moving average 24-hr standard deviation of temperature measured from
local monitor estimated in subgroups defined by diabetes (3a), coronary
heart disease (3b), obesity (3c), and age (3d). Associations were
estimated in linear mixed-effect regression models with random intercept
for study participant and adjusted for years since baseline visit, age
at baseline visit, race, body mass index, total cholesterol, mean
arterial pressure, diabetes, QT prolonging medication, years of
education, percent of census tract $25 years of age without high school
diploma, percent of census tract that is non-white, alcohol consumption,
smoking status, day of week, seasonality, 24-hour mean relative
humidity, and 4-hour lag black carbon concentration; associations
between moving average 24-hr standard deviation of temperature and QTc
in each subgroup were estimated from interaction models.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0106258.g004

not be generalizable to women, younger individuals, or to other racial
and ethnic groups. In conclusion, we observed that increases in the
daily mean temperature averaged over 3 to 4 weeks were associated with
longer QTc, while increases in the daily variability of mean temperature
averaged over 4 days and up to 4 weeks were associated with longer QTc,
particularly in colder months and in individuals with diabetes and
coronary heart disease. These novel findings may offer insight of an
important underlying mechanism by which temperature affects
cardiovascular events and mortality in an older population.

of surface temperature. To predict the 24-hour standard deviation of
temperature based on hourly estimates of surface temperatures would be
computationally intensive and not feasible for this study. Assuming the
estimation for daily standard deviation of temperature from a
spatiotemporal predictive model is more valid than measured from a local
monitor, we hypothesize that the observed associations between moving
averages of 24-hr standard deviation of temperature and QTc would have
reduced standard errors, as observed for the associations between moving
averages of 24-hr mean temperature and QTc. Our study also used a
predefined computer algorithm that automatically detected beat labels
and QT intervals, rather than use manual detection, to analyze the ECG
recordings. Thus, the outcome assessment of QTc is less susceptible to
differential measurement errors and inter-technician variability. We
hypothesize that any measurement error is likely independent of outdoor
temperature, and that the observed associations between outdoor
temperature and QTc underestimate the true associations. Finally, this
study also consists of older men who are predominantly white, thus the
observed findings may

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

Supporting Information File S1 Figures S1a-S1e: Associations between QTc
and 1 interquartile range increase of moving average 24-hr mean
temperature measured from spatiotemporal predictive model by season
(S1a) and by subgroups defined by diabetes (S1b), coronary heart disease
(S1c), obesity (S1d), and age (S1e). Associations were estimated in
linear mixed-effect regression models with random intercept for study
participant and adjusted for years since baseline 8

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258

Outdoor Temperature and QT Interval

visit, age at baseline visit, race, body mass index, total cholesterol,
mean arterial pressure, diabetes, QT prolonging medication, years of
education, percent of census tract $25 years of age without high school
diploma, percent of census tract that is non-white, alcohol consumption,
smoking status, day of week, seasonality, 24-hour mean relative
humidity, and 4-hour lag black carbon concentration; associations
between moving average 24-hr mean temperature and QTc in each subgroup
were estimated from interaction models. (TIF)

deviation of temperature in fully and minimally adjusted models. (DOC)

Author Contributions Conceived and designed the experiments: AJM DS PSV
JS. Analyzed the data: AJM. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis
tools: AJM IK AZ BC. Wrote the paper: AJM IK. Interpretation of data
analysis: AJM IK AZ BC DS PSV JS. Critical revision of manuscript: AJM
IK AZ BC DS PSV JS. Supervised and obtained funding for the study: JS.

Table S1 Difference in QTc per unit increase in moving average 24-hr
mean temperature and 24-hr standard

References 24. Hampel R, Schneider A, Brüske I, Zareba W, Cyrys J, et
al. (2010) Altered cardiac repolarization in association with air
pollution and air temperature among myocardial infarction survivors.
Environ Health Perspect 118: 1755--61. 25. Dekker JM, Schouten EG,
Klootwijk P, Pool J, Kromhout D (1994) Association between QT interval
and coronary heart disease in middle-aged and elderly men. The Zutphen
Study. Circulation 90: 779--85. 26. Schouten EG, Dekker JM, Meppelink P,
Kok FJ, Vandenbroucke JP, et al. (1991) QT interval prolongation
predicts cardiovascular mortality in an apparently healthy population.
Circulation 8: 1516--23. 27. Greenland P, Xie X, Liu K, Colangelo L,
Liao Y, et al. (2003) Impact of minor electrocardiographic ST-segment
and/or T-wave abnormalities on cardiovascular mortality during long-term
follow-up. Am J Cardiol 91: 1068--1074. 28. Roden DM (2008) Keep the QT
interval: it is a reliable predictor of ventricular arrhythmias. Heart
Rhythm 5:1213--1215. 29. Xu Z, Hu W, Wang X, Huang C, Tong S (2014) The
impact of temperature variability on years of life lost. Epidemiology
25: 313--4. 30. Bell B, Rose C, Damon A (1972) The Normative Aging
Study: an interdisciplinary and longitudinal study of health and aging.
Aging Hum Dev 3: 5--17. 31. Park SK, O'Neill MS, Vokonas PS, Sparrow D,
Schwartz J (2005) Effects of air pollution on heart rate variability:
the VA normative aging study. Environ Health Perspect 113: 304--9. 32.
Pope CA 3rd, Eatough DJ, Gold DR, Pang Y, Nielsen KR, et al. (2001)
Acute exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and heart rate
variability. Environ Health Perspect 109: 711--6. 33. Bednar MM,
Harrigan EP, Anziano RJ, Camm AJ, Ruskin JN (2001) The QT interval. Prog
Cardiovasc Dis 43(5 suppl 1):1--45. 34. Baja ES, Schwartz JD, Wellenius
GA, Coull BA, Zanobetti A, et al. (2010) Traffic-related air pollution
and QT interval: modification by diabetes, obesity, and oxidative stress
gene polymorphisms in the normative aging study. Environ Health Perspect
118: 840--6. 35. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware JH (2004) Applied
Longitudinal Analysis. Hoboken, NJ:Wiley-Interscience. 36. Arizona
Center for Education and Research on Therapeutics (2010) Torsades List:
Drugs with a Risk of Torsades de Pointes and Possible Torsades List:
Drugs with a Possible Risk of Torsades de Pointes. Available:
http://crediblemeds.org/ everyone/composite-list-all-qtdrugs/?rf=US
Accessed 2013 November 27. 37. Hernán MA, Lanoy E, Costagliola D, Robins
JM (2006) Comparison of dynamic treatment regimes via inverse
probability weighting. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 98: 237--42. 38.
Zanobetti A, Coull BA, Gryparis A, Kloog I, Sparrow D, et al. (2014)
Associations between arrhythmia episodes and temporally and spatially
resolved black carbon and particulate matter in elderly patients. Occup
Environ Med 71: 201--7. 39. Braga AL, Zanobetti A, Schwartz J (2002) The
effect of weather on respiratory and cardiovascular deaths in 12 U.S.
cities. Environ Health Perspect 110: 859-- 863. 40. Curriero FC, Heiner
KS, Samet JM, Zeger SL, Strug L, et al. (2002) Temperature and mortality
in 11 cities of the eastern United States. Am J Epidemiol 155: 80--87.
41. Bellavere F, Ferri M, Guarini L, Bax G, Piccoli A, et al. (1988)
Prolonged QT period in diabetic autonomic neuropathy: a possible role in
sudden cardiac death? Br Heart J 59: 379--383. 42. Choy AM, Lang CC,
Roden DM, Robertson D, Wood AJ, et al. (1998) Abnormalities of the QT
interval in primary disorders of autonomic failure. Am Heart J 136:
664--71. 43. Maule S, Rabbia F, Perni V, Tosello F, Bisbocci D, et al.
(2008) Prolonged QT interval and reduced heart rate variability in
patients with uncomplicated essential hypertension. Hypertens Res 31:
2003--10. 44. Bexton RS, Vallin HO, Camm AJ (1986) Diurnal variation of
the QT interval--- influence of the autonomic nervous system. Br Heart J
55: 253--8. 45. Zeger SL, Thomas D, Dominici F, Samet JM, Schwartz J, et
al. (2000) Exposure measurement error in time-series studies of air
pollution: concepts and consequences. Environ Health Perspect 108:
419--26.

1.  Basu R, Samet JM (2002) Relation between elevated ambient
    temperature and mortality: a review of the epidemiologic evidence.
    Epidemiol Rev 24: 190--202.
2.  Yu W, Mengersen K, Wang X, Ye X, Guo Y, et al. (2012) Daily average
    temperature and mortality among the elderly: a meta-analysis and
    systematic review of epidemiological evidence. Int J Biometeorol 56:
    569--81.
3.  Basu R (2009) High ambient temperature and mortality: a review of
    epidemiologic studies from 2001 to 2008. Environ Health 8: 40.
4.  Semenza JC, Rubin CH, Falter KH, Selanikio JD, Flanders WD, et al.
    (1996) Heat-related deaths during the July 1995 heat wave in
    Chicago. N Engl J Med 335: 84--90.
5.  Schwartz J (2005) Who is sensitive to extremes of temperature? A
    case-only analysis. Epidemiology 16: 67--72.
6.  O'Neill MS, Zanobetti A, Schwartz J (2003) Modifiers of the
    temperature and mortality association in seven US cities. Am J
    Epidemiol 157: 1074--82.
7.  Braga AL, Zanobetti A, Schwartz J (2001) The time course of
    weather-related deaths. Epidemiology. 2001 12: 662--7.
8.  Goodman PG, Dockery DW, Clancy L (2004) Cause-specific mortality and
    the extended effects of particulate pollution and temperature
    exposure. Environ Health Perspect 112: 179--85.
9.  Guo Y, Barnett AG, Yu W, Pan X, Ye X, et al. (2011) A large change
    in temperature between neighbouring days increases the risk of
    mortality. PLoS One 6: e16511.
10. Lin H, Zhang Y, Xu Y, Xu X, Liu T, et al. (2013) Temperature changes
    between neighboring days and mortality in summer: a distributed lag
    non-linear time series analysis. PLoS One 8: e66403.
11. Plavcová E, Kyselý J (2010) Relationships between sudden weather
    changes in summer and mortality in the Czech Republic, 1986--2005.
    Int J Biometeorol 54: 539--51.
12. Zanobetti A, O'Neill MS, Gronlund CJ, Schwartz JD (2012) Summer
    temperature variability and long-term survival among elderly people
    with chronic diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109: 6608--13.
13. Kloog I, Chudnovsky A, Koutrakis P, Schwartz J (2012) Temporal and
    spatial assessments of minimum air temperature using satellite
    surface temperature measurements in Massachusetts, USA. Sci Total
    Environ 432: 85--92.
14. Halonen JI, Zanobetti A, Sparrow D, Vokonas PS, Schwartz J (2010)
    Associations between outdoor temperature and markers of
    inflammation: a cohort study. Environ Health 9: 42.
15. Schäuble CL, Hampel R, Breitner S, Rückerl R, Phipps R, et al.
    (2012) Shortterm effects of air temperature on blood markers of
    coagulation and inflammation in potentially susceptible individuals.
    Occup Environ Med 69: 670--8.
16. Wilker EH, Yeh G, Wellenius GA, Davis RB, Phillips RS, et al. (2012)
    Ambient temperature and biomarkers of heart failure: a repeated
    measures analysis. Environ Health Perspect 120: 1083--7.
17. Halonen JI, Zanobetti A, Sparrow D, Vokonas PS, Schwartz J (2011)
    Relationship between outdoor temperature and blood pressure. Occup
    Environ Med 68: 296--301.
18. Hoffmann B, Luttmann-Gibson H, Cohen A, Zanobetti A, de Souza C, et
    al.

2012) Opposing effects of particle pollution, ozone, and ambient
      temperature on arterial blood pressure. Environ Health Perspect
      120: 241--6.

19. Bruce-Low SS, Cotterrell D, Jones GE (2006) Heart rate variability
    during high ambient heat exposure. Aviat Space Environ Med 77:
    915--20.
20. Okamoto-Mizuno K, Tsuzuki K, Mizuno K, Ohshiro Y (2009) Effects of
    low ambient temperature on heart rate variability during sleep in
    humans. Eur J Appl Physiol 105: 191--7.
21. Ren C, O'Neill MS, Park SK, Sparrow D, Vokonas P, et al. (2011)
    Ambient temperature, air pollution, and heart rate variability in an
    aging population. Am J Epidemiol 173: 1013--21.
22. Wu S, Deng F, Liu Y, Shima M, Niu J, et al. (2013) Temperature,
    traffic-related air pollution, and heart rate variability in a panel
    of healthy adults. Environ Res 120: 82--9.
23. Yamamoto S, Iwamoto M, Inoue M, Harada N (2007) Evaluation of the
    effect of heat exposure on the autonomic nervous system by heart
    rate variability and urinary catecholamines. J Occup Health 49:
    199--204.

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

9

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e106258


