Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

RESEARCH

Open Access

Associations between air pollution and perceived stress: the Veterans
Administration Normative Aging Study Amar J Mehta1*, Laura D Kubzansky2,
Brent A Coull3, Itai Kloog4, Petros Koutrakis1, David Sparrow5,6,7,
Avron Spiro III5,8,9, Pantel Vokonas5,7 and Joel Schwartz1

Abstract Background: There is mixed evidence suggesting that air
pollution may be associated with increased risk of developing
psychiatric disorders. We aimed to investigate the association between
air pollution and non-specific perceived stress, often a precursor to
development of affective psychiatric disorders. Methods: This
longitudinal analysis consisted of 987 older men participating in at
least one visit for the Veterans Administration Normative Aging Study
between 1995 and 2007 (n = 2,244 visits). At each visit, participants
were administered the 14-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), which
quantifies stress experienced in the previous week. Scores ranged from
0--56 with higher scores indicating increased stress. Differences in PSS
score per interquartile range increase in moving average (1, 2, and
4-weeks) of air pollution exposures were estimated using linear
mixed-effects regression after adjustment for age, race, education,
physical activity, anti-depressant medication use, seasonality,
meteorology, and day of week. We also evaluated effect modification by
season (April-September and March-October for warm and cold season,
respectively). Results: Fine particles (PM2.5), black carbon (BC),
nitrogen dioxide, and particle number counts (PNC) at moving averages of
1, 2, and 4-weeks were associated with higher perceived stress ratings.
The strongest associations were observed for PNC; for example, a 15,997
counts/cm3 interquartile range increase in 1-week average PNC was
associated with a 3.2 point (95%CI: 2.1-4.3) increase in PSS score.
Season modified the associations for specific pollutants; higher PSS
scores in association with PM2.5, BC, and sulfate were observed mainly
in colder months. Conclusions: Air pollution was associated with higher
levels of perceived stress in this sample of older men, particularly in
colder months for specific pollutants. Keywords: Aged, Air pollution,
Male, Particulate matter, Prospective studies, Stress, Psychological

Background There is emerging experimental and observational evidence
from recent studies to suggest that exposure to ambient air pollution
may be associated with neurobehavioral outcomes. Findings from
experimental studies in mice suggest that air pollution may be
associated with enhanced bias towards immediate reward [1] and
depression-like responses [2,3]. An observational study of children born
to non-smoking mothers observed an * Correspondence:
amehta@hsph.harvard.edu 1 Department of Environmental Health, Harvard
School of Public Health, Landmark Ctr, West 415, 401 Park Dr, Boston, MA
02215, USA Full list of author information is available at the end of
the article

association between pre-natal ambient exposure to polyaromatic
hydrocarbons and symptoms of anxiety and/or depression at ages between
six and seven years [4]. Observational studies in adults have also
demonstrated associations between air pollution and depression [5,6],
and suicide [7,8]. Similar findings from observational studies are also
shown for indoor air pollutants resulting from secondhand smoke [9,10]
and biomass fuel [11]. Associations between air pollution and mood [12]
and depressive [13] symptoms, and psychiatric emergencies [14] have also
been shown in early observational studies. Less known are the potential
effects of air pollution on psychological stress, and more specifically
perceived

© 2015 Mehta et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public
Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data
made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

stress, which when it occurs as a chronic state is thought to contribute
to the development of affective psychiatric disorders, including
depression [15-17]. Perceived stress has been linked with increased
likelihood of biological dysregulation including inflammation [18,19],
and greater risk of cardiovascular disease and premature mortality
[20-23]. Both social and physical determinants (e.g., socioeconomic
status, noise, crowding), of perceived stress have been evaluated
[24-26], and it is also hypothesized from earlier studies that the
association between air pollution and depression may be mediated by
perception of air quality [12,27]. However, whether objectively measured
air pollution is directly associated with psychological stress in
settings with relatively low-levels of ambient air pollution, where
perceived air quality is likely to have minimal influence, is unknown.
For this study, we evaluated whether air pollution levels, averaged over
of one and up to the previous four weeks, were associated with
non-specific perceived stress in a cohort of older community-dwelling
men living in the Boston Metropolitan Area. Taking consideration of
prior work suggesting that air pollution is associated with activation
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis [28] and hippocampal cytokine
inflammation [3], we hypothesized that objectively measured air
pollution is associated with higher perceived stress as mediated by
inflammation and glucocorticoid activity. We also account for a range of
potential confounders including age, individual level indicators of
socioeconomic status, physical activity, anti-depressant medication use,
seasonality, and meteorology. Evaluating the relationship between air
pollution and perceived stress in this sample of communitydwelling
individuals may provide insight into one mechanism by which exposure to
air pollution may be associated with risk of affective psychiatric
disorders.

Methods Study population and design

Participants included in this analysis were enrolled in the Veterans
Administration Normative Aging Study (NAS), an ongoing longitudinal
study of aging established in 1963, details of which have been published
previously [29]. Briefly, the NAS is a closed cohort of 2,280 male
volunteers from the Greater Boston area aged 21--81 years at entry, who
enrolled after an initial health screening determined that they were
free of known chronic medical conditions. The present study was approved
by the Human Research Committees of the Harvard School of Public Health,
and the Department of Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System, and
written informed consent was obtained from participants prior to
participation. The men have been reevaluated every 3--5 years by using
detailed on-site physical examinations and questionnaires. Dropout has
been less than 1% per year in this cohort and

Page 2 of 10

predominantly occurs when participants move out of the study area. The
other major reason for loss to follow-up has been mortality. Eligibility
for the current study required continued participation as of 1995 when
air pollution monitoring began. At this time, 1,118 individuals remained
in the study, participating in at least one study visit between 1995 and
2007 (Additional file 1: Figure S1). The NAS study population is
predominantly white, and 2% of the study population is black. The
current analysis was restricted to 987 participants with complete
information on the outcome, exposures, and covariates of interest in at
least one visit. In comparison with the 131 eligible NAS participants
who were not included in this analysis, the 987 included participants
were on average significantly younger, more educated, and less likely to
be current smokers (Additional file 1: Table S1). This analysis included
a maximum of 2,244 visits from 987 participants who had at least one but
ranging up to four scheduled visits over the course of the study; the
number of participant-visits utilized in the analysis varied by air
pollutant of interest as we excluded participant-visits for which air
pollution data in the relevant time period was not available. Refer to
Figure S1 (Additional file 1) outlining the inclusion of participants
for this analysis. For the purpose of this analysis, we will refer to
the first visit during the specified study period as the baseline visit.
Assessment of perceived stress

The 14-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) [15], a validated measure of
stress appraisal, was used to ascertain the degree to which respondents
felt their lives were “unpredictable, uncontrollable, and overloaded”
during the previous week. Each item was scored on a 5-point scale that
ranges from “never” (0) to “very often” (4). The scores for the positive
items in the 14-item scale were reversed, and a total score was obtained
by summing all items with scores ranging from 0 to 56, so that higher
scores indicate higher levels of perceived stress. The PSS is a widely
used stress appraisal measure; it correlates strongly with other
measures of psychosocial stress (e.g., life events) with depressive and
physical symptomatology, and has been shown to be associated with
greater risk of poor health [15]. Consistent with previous studies
[30-32], PSS scores were modestly stable across visits in this sample
(Intraclass correlation coefficient = 0.32). In this study sample, the
PSS score approximated normal distribution and was characterized as a
continuous variable. Assessment of air pollution and meteorology

Ambient particulate pollutant concentrations were monitored at our
Harvard Air Pollution Supersite located near downtown Boston 1 km from
the VA medical center. Particle measurements included ambient
particulate

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

matter ≤2.5 μm in diameter (PM2.5), black carbon (BC), particle number
counts (PNC), and sulfate particles (SO42−). We measured hourly PM2.5
concentrations with a Tapered Element Oscillation Microbalance (Model
1400A, Rupprecht and Pastashnick, East Greenbush, NY), and BC
concentrations using an Aethalometer (Magee Scientific Co., Model AE-16,
Berkeley, CA). BC is associated with traffic emissions especially those
related to diesel fuel combustion. Missing hourly concentration data for
PM2.5and BC were imputed using regression modeling, including a long
term time trend, day of week, hour of day, temperature, relative
humidity, barometric pressure and nitrogen dioxide concentrations (NO2)
as predictors. We measured hourly PNC (0.007 -- 3 μm particles per cm3)
with a Condensation Particle Counter (TSI Inc, Model 3022A, Shoreview,
MN). Particle number is mostly influenced by freshly generated particles
from local traffic [33]. We determined daily SO42− concentrations with a
Sulfate Particulate Analyzer (Thermo. Electron Co., Model 5020,
Franklin, MA) from 1999 to 2003. Subsequently, SO42− levels were
calculated from elemental sulfur, measured by X-Ray Fluorescence from
particle filters. For the year of overlap we fit a calibration
regression, which had an R2 over 0.9, and a slope of 1. SO42− particles
are formed through the oxidation of sulfur dioxide emitted primarily by
coal- and oil-burning power plants and can be transported regionally
over long distances (e.g., hundreds of kilometers) [34]. We obtained
hourly O3 and NO2 concentration data (ppm) from local state monitors
within the Greater Boston, and concentrations were estimated by
averaging data from all of the available sites. The median of the mean
distances of the participant homes from the central site monitoring
station was 20.7 km (Range: 0.9, 144.2); the medians of the mean
distances of the participant homes from the O3, and NO2 monitors were
24.9 km (Range: 8.4, 128.3), and 23.5 km (Range: 5.7, 127.1),
respectively. Hourly ambient temperature and dew point temperature data
were obtained from the first order National Weather Service station at
Boston Logan airport (8 km from the medical center). We calculated
apparent temperature, a human discomfort index [35], as: apparent
temperature = −2.653 + (0.994 × ambient temperature) + (0.0153 × (dew
point temperature)2 ), where ambient and dew point temperature are
measured in Celsius. Pollutant sampling, processing of samples, analysis
and reporting were conducted according to standard operating procedures
[36]. For each air pollutant that was measured from stationary monitors,
we considered the mediumterm exposure windows of 1, 2, and 4 week moving
average preceding each participant's examination. Additionally, all home
addresses of participants in the VA Normative Aging Study were geocoded,
and predicted average exposures to BC and PM2.5 were estimated using

Page 3 of 10

validated models described previously [37,38] by averaging the daily
predicted estimates at the participant's residential address or
addresses for the 1, 2, and 4 weeks before each clinical visit. More
specifically, predicted BC was estimated from a nonlinear land-use
regression model which was applied to within the greater Boston
metropolitan area [36], and predicted PM2.5 exposure was derived from
satellite aerosol optical depth measurements to generate both exposure
to PM2.5 at the area level (10 × 10 km) and the local level (100 m)
based on local land use variables [38]. Refer to Additional file 1 for
more detailed description of the models predicting exposure to BC and
PM2.5. Assessment of other covariates

At each examination, participants were followed up by physical
examination, updating of medical history, and measurement of biomarkers.
Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1, ml) was measured from
pulmonary function tests as previously reported and in accordance with
American Thoracic Society standards [39,40]. Weight and height were
measured with participants wearing only socks and underpants, from which
body mass index (BMI) (weight/height2) was calculated. Physical activity
was assessed on a scale derived by Paffenbarger et al. [41]. Responses
to questions about the number of flights of stairs climbed per day,
walking pace, and frequency of various sports activities were used to
derive a physical activity variable that assessed in metabolic
equivalent tasks score (METs) per week. Maximum educational attainment,
specifically years of education, was ascertained by questionnaire in
early visits. At each visit, participants were also asked to bring their
current medical prescriptions; antidepressant medication use included
any of the following classes of anti-depressants:
serotonin-norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitors, selective
serotonin-reuptake inhibitors, serotonin modulators,
norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitors, and noradrenergic and
specific serotonergic anti-depressants, and tricyclics and other
norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitors. Statistical analysis

All statistical analyses were carried out using SAS Version 9.2 (SAS
Institute, Cary, NC). We used time-varying linear mixed-effects
regression models with random participantspecific intercepts (via PROC
MIXED), accounting for the correlation of repeated measures [42], to
model PSS score as a continuous function of medium-term moving average
exposure (1, 2, and 4 weeks prior to visit) of PM2.5, BC, PNC, SO42−,
NO2, and O3 as measured from the stationary monitoring sites. We also
modeled PSS score as a continuous function of medium-term moving average
exposure of predicted PM2.5 and BC as estimated from the spatio-temporal
models, as we wished to evaluate whether the associations for predicted
PM2.5 and BC were

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

consistent with those exposures measured from the stationary monitoring
site. Estimated associations between air pollution and perceived stress
are given per interquartile range of the pollutant for the specific
moving average. We fit each moving average exposure of each pollutant
individually at a time in an established covariate model that included
potential determinants of perceived stress and potential confounders of
the association between air pollution and perceived stress. These
covariates included age at visit, race, years of education (<12, 12,
13--15, >15 as reference), 24-hour average apparent temperature (°C),
seasonality (sine and cosine of calendar day), weekday of visit,
physical activity at visit (METs per week, in quartiles or missing data,
lowest quartile as reference), and use of anti-depressant medication at
visit (no as reference). We did not consider additional adjustment for
smoking status and alcohol consumption in our primary analysis, as these
behavioral risks are potentially effects of perceived stress [43,44].
However, we further adjusted for smoking status (current, former, never
as reference) and alcohol consumption (≥2 drinks/day, < 2 drinks/day as
reference) as a sensitivity analysis. We also excluded
participant-visits with reported use of anti-depressant medication (n =
88) in all models as a sensitivity analysis. Considering the
epidemiologic evidence from community and population-based studies which
have shown a seasonal influence on mood states and depressive symptoms
[45,46], we also hypothesized that seasonal variation may be an
underlying susceptibility factor of higher stress ratings associated
with air pollution. Thus, we evaluated if season (April-September,
October-March for warm and cold season, respectively) modified the
associations between air pollution and perceived stress, by testing for
interaction between warm season (cold season as reference) and moving
average air pollution exposure. Healthier men may have be more likely to
participate in a subsequent follow-up visits, so we used stabilized
inverse probability weights (IPWs) to correct for this potential
survival bias [47] in all models. We calculated the probability of
participating in subsequent visits using two logistic regression models.
The first logistic regression model calculated the probability of
participating in the subsequent visit as a function of air pollution
concentration measured at the previous visit. Consistent with methods
previously described [48], the second logistic regression model
calculated the probability of participation in the follow-up visit in a
fully adjusted model including air pollution concentration, PSS score,
age, body mass index (kg/m2), FEV1 (ml), race (black, white as
reference), smoking status (current smoker, recent quitter, longtime
quitter, never smoker as reference), cumulative pack years smoked, years
of education (<12, 12,

Page 4 of 10

13--15, >15 as reference), hypertension, total cholesterol (mg/dL),
diabetes mellitus, and physician diagnosis of asthma, chronic
bronchitis, and emphysema measured at the previous visit. Subsequently,
we estimated stabilized IPWs for participation in the follow-up visit by
taking the ratio of the probability estimated from the first logistic
regression model over the probability estimated from the second logistic
regression model. The purpose of fitting air pollution exposure in the
logistic models is to prevent estimation of extreme values for the
weights; all weighted models met the necessary condition for correct
model specification such that the values for stabilized weights have a
mean of one [47]. The stabilized inverse probability weight at the
baseline visit was 1. As a sensitivity analysis, we estimated the
inverse probability of being included in the analysis among eligible
participants; rather than a constant of ‘1', the inverse probability of
being included in the analysis was assigned to the baseline visit.

Results Characteristics of all participants at the baseline study visit
are summarized in Table 1. The mean age of all participants was
approximately 69 years, and the majority of them (71%) participated in
at least 2 visits. Less than three percent of all participants reported
use of psychiatric medication, and 14 of these 27 participants reported
specific use of a psychotropic medication. Across participants, mean PSS
scores remained relatively stable at each visit, and generally, modest
correlations were observed for PSS score between visits (r ≥ 0.3) (Table
2). However, weaker correlations were observed for PSS Table 1
Characteristics of 987 participants at the baseline visit
Characteristics

n (%)*

Total number of visits One

288 (29)

Two

289 (29)

Three

262 (27)

Four

148 (15)

Age, mean (SD)

69.1 (7.0)

Race White

972 (98)

Black

15 (2)

Years of education, mean (SD) Use of anti-depressant medication

14.8 (2.9) 27 (3)

Physical activity (METS/week), mean (SD)

17.0 (21.7)

Missing information on physical activity

25 (3)

Abbreviations: SD standard deviation, METS metabolic equivalent of task
score. * Unless otherwise noted.

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

Page 5 of 10

Table 2 Summary statistics and Pearson correlation coefficients of PSS
scores at each visit Visit

n subjects

Mean (SD)

Visit 1

Visit 2

Visit 3

Visit 4

1

987

26.8 (6.8)

1.00

0.44

0.24

0.20

2

699

26.4 (6.7)

1.00

0.32

0.36

3

410

25.3 (7.6)

1.00

0.34

4

148

25.6 (8.2)

1.00

score between the first and third, and first and fourth visits (r =
0.2). Air pollution and meteorology distributions over the study period
are reported in Table 3. Daily concentrations of PM2.5 during the study
period were generally below the US National Ambient Air Quality Standard
(35 μg/m3); only 37 of the 4,680 days (0.8%) with PM2.5 daily
concentration measured exceeded the daily standard. A strong correlation
was observed between dailyPM2.5 and SO42− concentrations, and fair to
moderate correlations were observed between daily PM2.5 and BC, and NO2
concentrations. PM2.5 was weakly inversely correlated with PNC. Fair to
moderate correlations were also observed between daily BC and NO2, and
SO42−. A comparison of the distributions and correlations between PM2.5
and BC as measured from the stationary monitoring site and estimated
from the spatio-temporal predictive models are summarized in Tables S2
and S3, respectively, in Additional file 1. The mean PM2.5 concentration
at all moving averages were higher according to the predictive model
compared with the stationary monitor (Additional file 1: Table S2). Mean
PM2.5 as measured from the stationary monitor was also strongly
correlated with the corresponding mean concentration from the predictive
model at all moving averages. In contrast, the mean BC concentration as
estimated from the predictive model was considerably lower than the mean
concentration measured from the stationary monitor (Additional file 1:
Table S3), and the mean BC concentrations from the stationary monitoring
site and the

predictive model were weakly correlated at all moving averages.
Statistically significant (p < 0.05) positive associations were observed
between medium-term exposures to PM2.5, BC, PNC, and NO2 measured from
the stationary monitoring sites at moving averages of 1, 2, and 4 weeks,
and PSS score, such that higher air pollution levels were associated
with higher stress rating (Figure 1). After adjustment for all
covariates, an interquartile range increase in 1-week average pollutant
exposure was associated with a 0.5 point (95% confidence interval [CI]:
0.2, 0.9) increase in PSS score for a 4.7 μg/m3 increase in PM2.5; a 0.5
point (95% CI: 0.1, 0.9) increase in PSS score for a 0.5 μg/m3 increase
in BC; and a 0.8 point (95% CI: 0.4, 1.2) increase in PSS score for a
0.006 ppm increase in NO2. The strongest associations were observed for
PNC; a 15,997 counts/cm3 interquartile range increase in PNC was
associated with 3.2 point increase in PSS score (95% CI: 2.1, 4.3).
Associations for 2 and 4-week moving averages for PM2.5, BC, PNC, and
NO2 were similar compared with associations for the 1-week moving
average. All moving averages of SO42− and O3 exposures were not
associated with PSS score. Observed associations between air pollution
and PSS score presented in Figure 2 were largely unchanged after
excluding participant-visits with reported antidepressant medication use
(data not shown) and after additional adjustment for smoking status and
alcohol consumption (Additional file 1: Table S4). Only slight
differences, if at all, were observed for the estimated associations as
shown in Figure 1 (and Additional file 1: Table S4) after assigning an
inverse probability weight, derived from the probability of being
included in the analysis, to the baseline visit (Additional file 1:
Table S5). Overall, little difference was observed between weighted
models (as shown in Figure 1 and Additional file 1: Table S4) and
unweighted models, although the estimated associations were of slightly
lower magnitude after inverse probability of censoring weights were
incorporated (Additional file 1: Table S6).

Table 3 Summary statistics and Pearson correlation coefficients of
24-hour mean air pollutant concentrations and meteorological variables r

Summary statistics n days

Mean (SD)

Median (IQR)

PM2.5

BC

PNC

SO42−

NO2

O3

Apparent temperature

PM2.5, μg/m3

4,680

11.0 (6.4)

9.3 (6.6, 13.7)

1.00

0.68

−0.10

0.83

0.49

0.22

0.32

BC, μg/m

4,673

0.9 (0.6)

0.8 (0.5, 1.2)

1.00

0.07

0.49

0.66

−0.13

0.18

PNC, counts per cm3

2,580

23,615 (12,569)

20,613(13,616, 31.548)

1.00

−0.22

0.46

−0.35

−0.67

1.00

0.24

0.39

0.41

1.00

−0.23

−0.14

1.00

0.47

3

SO42−, μg/m3

2,816

3.0 (2.4)

2.3 (1.5, 3.7)

NO2, ppm

4,747

0.02 (0.01)

0.02 (0.01, 0.03)

O3, ppm

4,740

0.02 (0.01)

0.02 (0.01, 0.03)

Apparent temperature, °C

4,734

10.1 (10.2)

8.7 (1.3, 18.9)

1.00

Abbreviations: BC black carbon, IQR interquartile range, NO2 nitrogen
dioxide, O3 ozone, PM2.5 fine particulate matter ≤ 2.5 μm in aerodynamic
diameter, PNC particle number counts, SD standard deviation, SO42−
sulfate.

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

PM2.5

Page 6 of 10

BC

SO42-

PNC

NO2

O3

1 2 4

1 2 4

1 2 4

1 2 4

1 2 4

4.5

Difference in PSS score

4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 -0.5 -1.0 1 2 4

Moving average exposure time, weeks

Difference in PSS score

Figure 1 Adjusted difference in PSS score per interquartile range
increase in moving average air pollution exposure measured from
stationary monitors. Associations were estimated in linear mixed effect
regression with random intercept for participant after adjustment for
seasonality, weekday of visit, 24-hour mean apparent temperature, age,
race, years of education, use of anti-depressant medication, and
physical activity. Abbreviations: PSS -- 14-item Perceived Stress Scale;
PM2.5 --particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of <2.5 μm; BC
-- black carbon; NO2 -- nitrogen dioxide; O3 -- ozone; PNC -- particle
number counts; SO42− - sulfate.

6.5 6.0 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 -0.5 -1.0 -1.5
-2.0 -2.5

PM2.5

BC

SO42-

PNC

NO2

O3

Warm season (Apr-Sep) Cold season (Oct-Mar)

12 4 124 124 12 4 124 12 4 12 4 124 12 4 12 4 12 4 124

Moving average exposure time, weeks

Figure 2 Adjusted difference in PSS score per interquartile range
increase in moving average air pollution exposure measured from
stationary monitors in warm and cold seasons. Associations were
estimated in linear mixed effect regression with random intercept for
participant after adjustment for seasonality, weekday of visit, 24-hour
mean apparent temperature, age, race, years of education, use of
anti-depressant medication, and physical activity. Associations for warm
(April-September) and cold (OctoberMarch) seasons are estimated from
interactions between warm/cold season and moving average exposure.
Abbreviations: PSS -- 14-item Perceived Stress Scale; PM2.5
--particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of <2.5 μm; BC --
black carbon; NO2 -- nitrogen dioxide; O3 -- ozone; PNC -- particle
number counts; SO42− - sulfate.

Figure 2 summarizes the associations between PSS score and medium-term
exposures measured from the stationary monitoring sites by season.
Statistically significant interactions were observed between warm/cold
season and PM2.5, BC, and SO42− at all moving averages; positive
associations between PSS score and these pollutants were seen in mainly
in colder months. For PNC and NO2, positive associations between PSS
score and exposure were observed in both warm and cold seasons and the
confidence intervals widely overlapped each other. A statistically
significant interaction was also observed between warm/cold season and
1-week average O3; positive and inverse associations between PSS and
moving average O3 exposure were observed in warm and cold seasons,
respectively. As shown in Figure S2 (Additional file 1), overall there
were minimal differences in the estimated associations without
adjustment for seasonality (sine and cosine of calendar day) compared to
those presented in Figure 2. Table 4 summarizes the adjusted differences
in PSS score and medium-term exposures to predicted PM2.5 and BC
estimated from the spatio-temporal models. Statistically significant
positive associations were observed between PSS score and predicted
PM2.5 at all moving averages in the pooled model. Consistent with Figure
2, interactions were also present between warm/cold season and predicted
PM2.5 at all moving averages; the positive associations were of
considerably higher magnitude for the cold season. Compared with the
associations for PM2.5 measured from the stationary monitoring site as
presented in Figures 1 and 2, the associations for PM2.5 estimated from
the spatio-temporal model were generally of slightly higher magnitude
with wider variation. Compared with the associations for BC measured
from the stationary monitoring site as presented in Figures 1 and 2, a
similar pattern of findings were observed for predicted BC estimated
from the spatio-temporal model. However, the associations for predicted
BC were moderately lower in magnitude; positive associations between PSS
score and predicted BC in the pooled model and in the cold season were
of marginal statistical significance.

Discussion In this sample of predominantly white older men, we observed
that medium-term exposures to PM2.5, BC, PNC, and NO2, as measured from
stationary monitoring sites, were associated with higher perceived
stress rating. Notably, PNC, BC, and NO2 are all traffic pollutants,
suggesting that traffic emissions, and particularly fresh ultrafine
particles, are the principal source of these associations. Season
modified the associations for specific pollutants, and the associations
between PM2.5, BC, and SO4−2 and higher PSS scores were observed mainly
in colder months, while O3 was associated with lower PSS scores during

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

Page 7 of 10

Table 4 Adjusted difference in PSS score* per interquartile range
increase in moving average PM2.5 and BC exposure as predicted from
spatio-temporal models PM2.5

Moving average

BC

Pooled

Warm season (Apr-Sep)

Cold season (Mar-Oct)

Pooled

Warm season (Apr-Sep)

Cold season (Mar-Oct)

β (95% CI)

β (95% CI)

β (95% CI)

β (95% CI)

β (95% CI)

β (95% CI)

1-week

0.80 (0.15, 1.44)

0.43 (−0.43, 1.29)

1.34 (0.38, 2.30)

0.32 (−0.04, 0.68)

0.03 (−0.55, 0.62)

0.48 (0.03, 0.92)

2-week

1.07 (0.43, 1.71)

0.56 (−0.33, 1.46)

1.78 (0.83, 2.74)

0.28 (−0.09, 0.64)

0.04 (−0.53, 0.62)

0.41 (−0.04, 0.86)

4-week

0.96 (0.41, 1.51)

0.31 (−0.47, 1.08)

1.79 (0.93, 2.65)

0.30 (−0.06, 0.67)

0.06 (−0.51, 0.62)

0.46 (−0.00, 0.92)

Abbreviations: PSS 14-item Perceived Stress Scale, PM2.5 particulate
matter with an aerodynamic diameter of <2.5 μm, BC black carbon. * As
estimated in linear mixed effect regression with random intercept for
participant adjusting for seasonality, weekday of visit, 24-hour mean
apparent temperature, age, race, years of education, use of
anti-depressant medication, and physical activity; associations for warm
and cold months are estimated from interactions between warm/cold season
and moving average exposure.

colder months. A consistent pattern of findings were also observed for
predicted PM2.5 and BC estimated from the spatio-temporal models,
although the associations were of higher magnitude for predicted PM2.5
and of lower magnitude for predicted BC compared with the associations
for these exposures measured from the stationary monitoring site. While
prior work focused on the relation between air pollution levels and
perceived air quality [12,13,27,49], this is the first large scale study
to investigate objectively measured air pollutant levels in association
with nonspecific perceived stress, where the range of air pollution
levels observed in during the study period were unlikely to alter
perceptions of air quality. The observed associations between air
pollution and perceived stress may offer insight into recent findings
linking air pollution with depressive symptoms and hospitalizations for
depression in studies conducted in Korea and Canada [5,6]. In the former
study, investigators identified associations of a 3-day moving average
of PM10 and O3, and 7-day average of NO2 with significantly higher
reports of depressive symptoms in a cross-sectional communitybased study
of 537 elderly individuals [6]. Additionally, air pollution was more
strongly with emotional symptoms such as feeling less happy than with
somatic symptoms. In the latter study, a multi-city time series analysis
demonstrated that same-day increases in air concentrations of carbon
monoxide, and NO2 during warm months, and PM10 during cold months were
associated with more emergency admissions for depression. If air
pollution increases perceptions of stress, and higher levels of stress
trigger more depressive symptoms and episodes, this may be one pathway
by which air pollution alters depressive status. That Szyszkowicz and
colleagues [5] observed associations for PM10 and depression admissions
during cold months is also of interest. Season also modified the
associations between higher PSS scores and PM2.5, BC, and SO4−2,
components of ambient particulate matter, in the present analysis such
that these associations were also

observed mainly in colder months. How season may affect susceptibility
to higher perceived stress rating in association with air pollution in
this study population is not clear and merits further investigation.
Additionally, while PM2.5, BC, and SO4−2 were associated with higher PSS
score during colder months, contrasting findings were observed for O3,
in which higher exposure was observed with lower PSS score during colder
months. The contrast in findings between these pollutants in association
with PSS score is not clear, but opposing directions for associations
between PM2.5 and O3 with arterial blood pressure have been observed in
a panel study of older adults with diabetes living in the Boston
Metropolitan area [50]. The underlying biological mechanisms by which
air pollution may actually lead to altered perceptions of stress are as
yet unknown. Experimental studies in mice have demonstrated associations
between acute and chronic exposures to particulates and activation of
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis [28] and hippocampal
pro-inflammatory cytokine expression [3], respectively. The former study
observed that 4-hour exposure to particles increased plasma levels of
adrenocorticotropic hormone and the glucocorticoid corticosterone, with
a corresponding increase in markers of glucocorticoid activity [28].
Lead, a ubiquitous environmental pollutant known for its neurotoxic
effects, has also been observed to be associated with rat hippocampal
pro-inflammatory cytokine expression [51]. Findings from experimental
and observational studies also suggest that increased glucocorticoid
activity study may be associated with environmental reactivity [52],
perceived stress [53], and stress-related disorders [54]. Taking these
findings together, we hypothesize that the association between ambient
air pollution and higher perceived stress may be mediated by brain
inflammation and glucocorticoid activity. The public health relevance of
the present findings are multifold, considering that perceived stress is
a risk factor for affective psychiatric disorders [15-17], inflammation

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

[18,19], and cardiovascular disease and mortality [20-23]. While
previous studies show that psychological stress may enhance
susceptibility for air-pollution-related health effects [55-57], the
current findings suggest that stress may also be a mediating factor
which should be taken into consideration. Thus, it may be hypothesized
that the physical environment may alter mental health in addition to
physical health, and possibly affect physical health by first altering
mental health. This study has a number of strengths including
prospective design to investigate the role of air pollution from various
sources on repeated measures of perceived stress, use of validated
spatio-temporal models for assessment of exposure to air pollution,
methods to address selection bias, and adjustment for multiple
confounders. However, there are several limitations should be
considered. While observed associations are not confounded by such
factors as age, individual level indicators of socioeconomic status,
psychiatric medication use, physical activity, temperature, and
seasonality which could influence air pollution exposure as well as
levels of perceived stress, there may be unmeasured confounding from
other factors associated with perceived stress in this study sample such
as environmental noise. Road traffic and aircraft noise have also been
shown to be associated with higher salivary cortisol levels [58,59] and
symptoms of anxiety and perceived stress [60-62]. For this analysis, we
hypothesize that the factors (i.e. meteorology, wind speed, wind
direction) that explain the week to week variation in exposure to
traffic-related air pollution do not strongly overlap with those that
explain the week to week variation in exposure to traffic-related noise.
Moreover, while levels of pollution were relatively low it is as yet
unclear at what levels individuals can detect changes. Since perception
of air quality itself may also correlate with actual exposure levels,
the observed effects from this study could be due in part to subjective
perceptions of pollution; however, it has also been shown perceived air
quality may actually be a function of mood states and anxiety [63,64].
In fact, PM2.5 daily concentration measured at the central monitoring
site exceeded the daily standard in only less than 1% of all days in the
study period, thus it is unlikely that perceived air quality would have
more than minimal influence on the observed associations in this study.
Exposure measurement error is also a potential source of bias as we
relied on central monitoring site for measurement of ambient particulate
concentrations, which may not be representative of where these
participants reside. The interpretation of the overall findings for
predicted PM2.5 and BC estimated from the spatio-temporal models was
generally consistent with PM2.5 and BC measured from the stationary
monitoring site; however the associations for predicted PM2.5 and BC
were of higher and lower magnitude, respectively, in comparison with the

Page 8 of 10

associations for their respective exposures measured from the stationary
monitoring site. The comparison of associations between PM2.5 and PSS
scores utilizing stationary monitoring site measurements and
spatiotemporal predictive estimates suggests that there may be a higher
degree of non-differential exposure measurement error from using the
stationary monitoring site exposure measurements leading to a bias
towards the null. However, spatial smoothing induces Berskson error, and
the marginally wider confidence intervals observed for the
spatio-temporal predictive estimates of PM2.5 are consistent with that.
In contrast, the estimated associations were of lower magnitude
utilizing the spatio-temporal predictive estimates of BC compared with
the stationary site measurements of BC while the confidence intervals
were of similar length. PM2.5 is generally considered to be a regional
pollutant and BC is a near-roadway pollutant (mobile sources), and BC
generally has more measurement error in regional models [65]. In this
study, the spatial R2 of the land-use regression BC model is much lower
than the satellite-derived aerosol optical depth PM2.5 model; thus there
may be more classical measurement error in the spatial variation of BC
exposure. Lastly, the population in this analysis is relatively
homogeneous, consisting of predominantly white older men. Thus, these
results cannot be generalized to other populations without further
research on how effects vary by age, gender and race.

Conclusions In conclusion, we identified novel associations between
medium-term exposures to air pollution and higher stress rating in this
sample of predominantly white elderly men, more so in colder months for
specific pollutants. The findings support the hypothesis that perceived
stress may be a mediating factor for the association between air
pollution and affective disorders. Additional file Additional file 1:
Supplementary material. Abbreviations PSS: 14-item Perceived stress
scale; NAS: VA normative aging study; PM2.5: Particulate matter ≤ 2.5 μm
in diameter; BC: Black carbon; PNC: Particle number counts; SO42−:
Sulfate; O3: Ozone; NO2: Nitrogen dioxide. Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors'
contributions Authors DS, AS, PV, and JS made substantial contributions
to conception and design, and acquisition of data. Authors IK, BC, PK,
and JS were involved in development or application of the
spatio-temporal predicting black carbon and PM2.5. Authors LDK and JS
helped supervise the statistical analysis and designed the study's
analytic strategy. Author AJM performed the statistical analysis and
drafted the manuscript. All authors were involved in critical revision
of the manuscript for important intellectual content. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

Acknowledgements The authors thank the participants and staff of the VA
Normative Aging Study. This work was supported by the grants from the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (ES014663-01A2 and
P01 ES09825) and from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA
R832416, R827353, and R83241601). The Veterans Affairs (VA) Normative
Aging Study is supported by the Cooperative Studies Program/Epidemiology
Research and Information Center of the US Department of Veterans Affairs
and is a component of the Massachusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research
and Information Center, Boston, Massachusetts. Support was also provided
by NIH grant R01-AG018436. This research was also supported by a VA
Research Career Scientist award to David Sparrow and a VA Senior
Research Career Scientist award to Avron Spiro, III. This publication
was made possible by USEPA grant (R832416, R827353, R83241601, and EPA
Clean Air Research Center grant RD83479801). Its contents are solely the
responsibility of the grantee and do not necessarily represent the
official views of the USEPA. Further, USEPA does not endorse the
purchase of any commercial products or services mentioned in the
publication. Author details 1 Department of Environmental Health,
Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Ctr, West 415, 401 Park Dr,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. 2Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, USA. 3Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, USA. 4Department
of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. 5The VA Normative Aging Study, VA Boston
Healthcare System, Boston, USA. 6The Channing Laboratory, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA. 7Department of
Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, USA. 8Department
of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, USA.
9Department of Psychiatry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
USA. Received: 14 August 2014 Accepted: 9 January 2015 Published: 27
January 2015 References 1. Allen JL, Conrad K, Oberdörster G, Johnston
CJ, Sleezer B, Cory-Slechta DA. Developmental exposure to concentrated
ambient particles and preference for immediate reward in mice. Environ
Health Perspect. 2013;121:32--8. 2. Davis DA, Bortolato M, Godar SC,
Sander TK, Iwata N, Pakbin P, et al. Prenatal exposure to urban air
nanoparticles in mice causes altered neuronal differentiation and
depression-like responses. PLoS One. 2013;8:e64128. 3. Fonken LK, Xu X,
Weil ZM, Chen G, Sun Q, Rajagopalan S, et al. Air pollution impairs
cognition, provokes depressive-like behaviors and alters hippocampal
cytokine expression and morphology. Mol Psychiatry. 2011;16:987--95.
973. 4. Perera FP, Tang D, Wang S, Vishnevetsky J, Zhang B, Diaz D, et
al. Prenatal polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) exposure and child
behavior at age 6--7 years. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120:921--6. 5.
Lim YH, Kim H, Kim JH, Bae S, Park HY, Hong YC. Air pollution and
symptoms of depression in elderly adults. Environ Health Perspect.
2012;120:1023--8. 6. Szyszkowicz M, Rowe BH, Colman I. Air pollution and
daily emergency department visits for depression. Int J Occup Med
Environ Health. 2009;22:355--62. 7. Kim C, Jung SH, Kang DR, Kim HC,
Moon KT, Hur NW, et al. Ambient particulate matter as a risk factor for
suicide. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167:1100--7. 8. Szyszkowicz M, Willey JB,
Grafstein E, Rowe BH, Colman I. Air pollution and emergency department
visits for suicide attempts in vancouver, Canada. Environ Health
Insights. 2010;4:79--86. 9. Bandiera FC, Caban-Martinez AJ, Arheart KL,
Davila EP, Fleming LE, Dietz NA, et al. Secondhand smoke policy and the
risk of depression. Ann Behav Med. 2010;39:198--203. 10. Hamer M,
Stamatakis E, Batty GD. Objectively assessed secondhand smoke exposure
and mental health in adults: cross-sectional and prospective evidence
from the Scottish health survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67:850--5.

Page 9 of 10

11. Banerjee M, Siddique S, Dutta A, Mukherjee B, Ranjan Ray M. Cooking
    with biomass increases the risk of depression in pre-menopausal
    women in India. Soc Sci Med. 2012;75:565--72.
12. Bullinger M. Psychological effects of air pollution on healthy
    residents---a time-series approach. J Environ Psychol.
    1989;9:103--18.
13. Jacobs SV, Evans GW, Catalano R, Dooley D. Air pollution and
    depressive symptomatology: exploratory analyses of intervening
    psychosocial factors. Popul Environ. 1984;7:260--72.
14. Rotton J, Frey J. Psychological costs of air pollution: atmospheric
    conditions, seasonal trends, and psychiatric emergencies. Popul
    Environ. 1984;7:3--16.
15. Cohen S, Kessler RC, Gordon LG. Strategies for measuring stress in
    studies of psychiatric and physical disorders. In: Cohen S, Kessler
    RC, Gordon LG, editors. Measuring Stress: A Guide for Health and
    Social Scientists. New York: Oxford University Press; 1995. p.
    3--28.
16. Hewitt PL, Flett GL, Mosher SW. The perceived stress scale: factor
    structure and relation to depression symptoms in a psychiatric
    sample. J Psychopathol Behav Assess. 1992;14:247--57.
17. Martin RA, Kazarian SS, Breiter HJ. Perceived stress, life events,
    dysfunctional attitudes, and depression in adolescent psychiatric
    inpatients. J Psychopathol Behav Assess. 1995;17:81--95.
18. Jain S, Mills PJ, von Känel R, Hong S, Dimsdale JE. Effects of
    perceived stress and uplifts on inflammation and coagulability.
    Psychophysiology. 2007;44:154--60.
19. McDade TW, Hawkley LC, Cacioppo JT. Psychosocial and behavioural
    predictors of inflammation in middle-aged and older adults: the
    Chicago health, aging, and social relations study. Psychosom Med.
    2006;68:376--81.
20. Arnold SV, Smolderen KG, Buchanan DM, Li Y, Spertus JA. Perceived
    stress in myocardial infarction: long-term mortality and health
    status outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:1756--63.
21. Iso H, Date C, Yamamoto A, Toyoshima H, Tanabe N, Kikuchi S, et al.
    Perceived mental stress and mortality from cardiovascular disease
    among Japanese men and women: the Japan collaborative cohort study
    for evaluation of cancer risk sponsored by monbusho (JACC Study).
    Circulation. 2002;106:1229--36.
22. Nielsen NR, Kristensen TS, Schnohr P, Grønbaek M. Perceived stress
    and cause-specific mortality among men and women: results from a
    prospective cohort study. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;168:481--91.
23. Yu RH, Ho SC, Lam CW, Woo JL, Ho SS. Psychological factors and
    subclinical atherosclerosis in postmenopausal Chinese women in Hong
    Kong. Maturitas. 2010;67:186--91.
24. Evans GW, Lepore SJ. Conceptual and analytic issues in crowding
    research. J Environ Psych. 1992;12:163--73.
25. Finkelstein DM, Kubzansky LD, Capitman J, Goodman E. Socioeconomic
    differences in adolescent stress: the role of psychological
    resources. J Adolesc Health. 2007;40:127--34.
26. Wen M, Hawkley LC, Cacioppo JT. Objective and perceived neighborhood
    environment, individual SES and psychosocial factors, and self-rated
    health: an analysis of older adults in Cook County, Illinois. Soc
    Sci Med. 2006;63:2575--90.
27. Marques S, Lima ML. Living in grey areas: industrial activity and
    psychological health. J Environ Psych. 2011;31:314--22.
28. Thomson EM, Vladisavljevic D, Mohottalage S, Kumarathasan P, Vincent
    R. Mapping acute systemic effects of inhaled particulate matter and
    ozone: multi-organ gene expression and glucocorticoid activity.
    Toxicol Sci. 2013;135:169--81.
29. Bell B, Rose C, Damon A. The normative aging study: an
    interdisciplinary and longitudinal study of health and aging. Aging
    Hum Dev. 1972;3:5--17.
30. Andreou E, Alexopoulos EC, Lionis C, Varvogli L, Gnardellis C,
    Chrousos GP, et al. Perceived stress scale: reliability and validity
    study in Greece. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2011;8:3287--98.
31. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived
    stress. J Health Soc Behav. 1983;24:385--96.
32. Remor E. Psychometric properties of a European Spanish version of
    the perceived stress scale (PSS). Span J Psychol. 2006;9:86--93.
33. Thurston GD, Spengler JD. A quantitative assessment of source
    contributions to inhalable particulate matter pollution in
    metropolitan Boston. Atmos Environ. 1985;19:9--25.
34. Morawska L, Zhang JJ. Combustion sources of particles. 1. Health
    relevance and source signatures. Chemosphere. 2002;49:1045--58.

Mehta et al. Environmental Health 2015, 14:10
http://www.ehjournal.net/content/14/1/10

35. Steadman RG. Assessment of sultriness part I. temperature-humidity
    index based on human physiology and clothing science. J Appl
    Meteorol. 1979;18:861--73.
36. Dockery DW, Luttmann-Gibson H, Rich DQ, Link MS, Schwartz JD, Gold
    DR, et al. Particulate air pollution and nonfatal cardiac events.
    Part II. Association of air pollution with confirmed arrhythmias
    recorded by implanted defibrillators. Res Rep Health Eff Inst.
    2005;124:83--126.
37. Gryparis A, Coull B, Schwartz J, Suh HH. Semiparametric latent
    variable regression models for spatiotemporal modelling of mobile
    source particles in the greater Boston area. J R Stat Soc Ser C.
    2007;56:183--209.
38. Kloog I, Ridgway B, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Schwartz JD. Long- and
    short-term exposure to PM2.5 and mortality: using novel exposure
    models. Epidemiology. 2013;24:555--61.
39. American Thoracic Society. Standardization of spirometry, 1994
    update. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1995;152:1107--36.
40. Sparrow D, O'Connor G, Colton T, Barry CL, Weiss ST. The
    relationship of nonspecific bronchial responsiveness to the
    occurrence of respiratory symptoms and decreased levels of pulmonary
    function. The normative aging study. Am Rev Respir Dis.
    1987;135:1255--60.
41. Paffenbarger Jr RS, Hyde RT, Wing AL, Hsieh CC. Physical activity,
    allcause mortality, and longevity of college alumni. N Engl J Med.
    1986;314:605Y13.
42. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware JH. Applied Longitudinal Analysis.
    Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience; 2004.
43. Cohen S, Lichtenstein E. Perceived stress, quitting smoking, and
    smoking relapse. Health Psychol. 1990;9:466--78.
44. Rod NH, Grønbaek M, Schnohr P, Prescott E, Kristensen TS. Perceived
    stress as a risk factor for changes in health behaviour and cardiac
    risk profile: a longitudinal study. J Intern Med. 2009;266:467--75.
45. Harmatz MG, Well AD, Overtree CE, Kawamura KY, Rosal M, Ockene IS.
    Seasonal variation of depression and other moods: a longitudinal
    approach. J Biol Rhythms. 2000;15:344--50.
46. Oyane NM, Bjelland I, Pallesen S, Holsten F, Bjorvatn B. Seasonality
    is associated with anxiety and depression: the Hordaland health
    study. J Affect Disord. 2008;105:147--55.
47. Cole SR, Hernán MA. Constructing inverse probability weights for
    marginal structural models. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;168:656--64.
48. Lepeule J, Baccarelli A, Motta V, Cantone L, Litonjua AA, Sparrow D,
    et al. Gene promoter methylation is associated with lung function in
    the elderly: the normative aging study. Epigenetics. 2012;7:261--9.
49. Honold J, Beyer R, Lakes T, van der Meer E. Multiple environmental
    burdens and neighborhood-related health of city residents. J Environ
    Psych. 2012;32:305--17.
50. Hoffmann B, Luttmann-Gibson H, Cohen A, Zanobetti A, de Souza C,
    Foley C, et al. Opposing effects of particle pollution, ozone, and
    ambient temperature on arterial blood pressure. Environ Health
    Perspect. 2012;120:241--6.
51. Struzynska L, Dabrowska-Bouta B, Koza K, Sulkowski G.
    Inflammation-like glial response in lead-exposed immature rat brain.
    Toxicol Sci. 2007;95:156--62.
52. Hebda-Bauer EK, Pletsch A, Darwish H, Fentress H, Simmons TA, Wei Q,
    et al. Forebrain glucocorticoid receptor overexpression increases
    environmental reactivity and produces a stress-induced spatial
    discrimination deficit. Neuroscience. 2010;169:645--53.
53. de Rooij SR, Costello PM, Veenendaal MV, Lillycrop KA, Gluckman PD,
    Hanson MA, et al. Associations between DNA methylation of a
    glucocorticoid receptor promoter and acute stress responses in a
    large healthy adult population are largely explained by lifestyle
    and educational differences. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
    2012;37:782--8.
54. Raison CL, Miller AH. When not enough is too much: the role of
    insufficient glucocorticoid signaling in the pathophysiology of
    stress-related disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160:1554--65.
55. Chen E, Schreier HM, Strunk RC, Brauer M. Chronic traffic-related
    air pollution and stress interact to predict biologic and clinical
    outcomes in asthma. Environ Health Perspect. 2008;116:970--5.
56. Clougherty JE, Levy JI, Kubzansky LD, Ryan PB, Suglia SF, Canner MJ,
    et al. Synergistic effects of traffic-related air pollution and
    exposure to violence on urban asthma etiology. Environ Health
    Perspect. 2007;115:1140--6.
57. Islam T, Urman R, Gauderman WJ, Milam J, Lurmann F, Shankardass K,
    et al. Parental stress increases the detrimental effect of traffic
    exposure on children's lung function. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
    2011;184:822--7.

Page 10 of 10

58. Selander J, Bluhm G, Theorell T, Pershagen G, Babisch W, Seiffert I,
    et al. Saliva cortisol and exposure to aircraft noise in six
    European countries. Environ Health Perspect. 2009;117:1713--7.
59. Wagner J, Cik M, Marth E, Santner BI, Gallasch E, Lackner A, et al.
    Feasibility of testing three salivary stress biomarkers in relation
    to naturalistic traffic noise exposure. Int J Hyg Environ Health.
    2010;213:153--5.
60. Evans GW, Lercher P, Meis M, Ising H, Kofler WW. Community noise
    exposure and stress in children. J Acoust Soc Am. 2001;109:1023--7.
61. Haines MM, Stansfeld SA, Job RF, Berglund B, Head J. A follow-up
    study of effects of chronic aircraft noise exposure on child stress
    responses and cognition. Int J Epidemiol. 2001;30:839--45.
62. Stansfeld S, Gallacher J, Babisch W, Shipley M. Road traffic noise
    and psychiatric disorder: prospective findings from the Caerphilly
    Study. BMJ. 1996;313:266--7.
63. Lercher P, Schmitzberger R, Kofler W. Perceived traffic air
    pollution, associated behavior and health in an alpine area. Sci
    Total Environ. 1995;169:71--4.
64. Persson R, Björk J, Ardö J, Albin M, Jakobsson K. Trait anxiety and
    modeled exposure as determinants of self-reported annoyance to
    sound, air pollution and other environmental factors in the home.
    Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2007;81:179--91.
65. Smith KR, Jerrett M, Anderson HR, Burnett RT, Stone V, Derwent R, et
    al. Public health benefits of strategies to reduce greenhouse-gas
    emissions: health implications of short-lived greenhouse pollutants.
    Lancet. 2009;374:2091--103. doi:10.1186/1476-069X-14-10 Cite this
    article as: Mehta et al.: Associations between air pollution and
    perceived stress: the Veterans Administration Normative Aging Study.
    Environmental Health 2015 14:10.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central and take full advantage
of: • Convenient online submission • Thorough peer review • No space
constraints or color ﬁgure charges • Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar • Research which
is freely available for redistribution Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit


