Epidemiology Publish Ahead of Print DOI: 10.1097/EDE.0000000000000424
Association between Particulate Air Pollution and QT Interval Duration
in an Elderly Cohort

Vokonas4, Joel Schwartz1,5

TE D

Irina Mordukhovich1, Itai Kloog1,2, Brent Coull3, Petros Koutrakis1,
Pantel

1. Exposure, Epidemiology, and Risk Program, Department of Environmental

Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

EP

2. Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
   University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. 3. Department of
   Biostatistics,

Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
4. VA Normative Aging Study, Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System
and the

C

Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Massachusetts,

C

USA. 5. Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical

A

School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Corresponding Author: Irina Mordukhovich, Exposure, Epidemiology and
Risk Program, Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health. Landmark

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Center, 401 Park Dr., Boston, MA 02215. imordukh@hsph.harvard.edu,
phone: 617-384-8754, fax: 617-384-8859.

TE D

Running title: Particulate matter and QT interval duration Conflicts of
Interest and Source of Funding: Potential conflicts of interest: none
declared

Sources of financial support: This work was supported by the US
Environmental

EP

Protection Agency grants R832416 and RD 83479801 and by the National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences grants ES015172-01 and
ES000002. The VA Normative Aging Study is supported by the Cooperative
Studies

C

Program/Epidemiology Research and Information Center of the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs and is a component of the Massachusetts
Veterans

C

Epidemiology Research and Information Center, Boston, Massachusetts.

A

Acknowledgments:

The authors thank Dr. Murray Mittleman and Dr. David Sparrow for their
contributions to this manuscript. Word count: Abstract: 249 words

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Main text: 3,645 words

Number of pages:

A

C

C

EP

TE D

overall: 26, text: 22, table: 4

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Short-term fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
exposure has been linked with increased QT interval duration, a marker
of ventricular repolarization

TE D

and a risk factor for cardiac arrhythmia and sudden death, in several
studies. Only one previous study evaluated whether long-term PM exposure
is related to the QT

interval. We aim to evaluate whether sub-chronic and long-term exposure
to PM2.5 at home is linked with QT duration in an elderly cohort.

METHODS: We measured heart-rate corrected QT interval duration among 404

EP

participants from the Greater Boston area between 2003 and 2011. We
modeled

residential PM2.5 exposures using a hybrid satellite- and land use-based
model. We evaluated associations between moving averages of short-term
(1-2 day), sub-

C

chronic (3-28 day) and long-term (1 year) pollutant exposures and
corrected QT duration using linear mixed models. We also evaluated
effect modification by

C

oxidative stress genetic score using separated regression models and
interaction

A

terms.

RESULTS: We observed positive associations between sub-chronic and
longterm PM2.5 exposure and corrected QT duration, with the strongest
results for

longer-term exposures. For example, a 1 standard deviation increase in
1-year PM2.5 was associated with a 6.3 ms increase in corrected QT (95%
confidence

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

interval: 1.8, 11). We observed somewhat greater effects among subjects
with higher (8.5 ms) rather than lower (3.1 ms) oxidative stress allelic
profiles (pinteraction=0.25).

TE D

CONCLUSIONS: PM2.5 was associated with increased corrected QT duration
in an elderly cohort. While most previous studies focused on short-term
air pollution exposures, our results suggest that longer-term exposures
are associated with

A

C

C

EP

cardiac repolarization.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

INTRODUCTION Exposure to particulate air pollution is associated with
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in numerous epidemiologic
studies, especially among the elderly and

TE D

those with preexisting medical conditions.1,2 The mechanisms mediating
this increase in risk are not fully understood, but may include
particle-induced increases in oxidative stress,3,4 autonomic
dysfunction,5 and systemic inflammation.6

On a functional level, associations between particulate pollution and

EP

cardiovascular events may be mediated in part by changes in cardiac

repolarization.2,7 The QT interval represents the duration of
ventricular depolarization and repolarization and prolongation of this
interval is an established

C

risk factor for arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death.8,9 Sudden deaths in
particular have been associated with particulate air pollution.10
Short-term particulate

C

pollutant exposure was associated with QT interval duration in several
epidemiological and animal studies.7,11,12 However, although
associations between

A

particulate air pollution exposure and the risk of adverse
cardiovascular outcomes are generally strongest for long-term rather
than short-term pollutant exposures, only one cross-sectional study has
previously examined the association between particles and QT interval
duration.13 This study found a positive association

between 1-year PM2.5 exposure and the risk of QT prolongation. Our aim
was to

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

further evaluate the association between intermediate-term and
long-term air pollution exposures and QT interval duration among a
longitudinal cohort of elderly men: the Normative Aging Study.

TE D

Specifically, we hypothesized that sub-chronic (3-28 day) and long-term
(1 year) increases in exposure to particulate matter less than 2.5
micrometers in

aerodynamic diameter (PM2.5) would be related to increased duration of
the heart-

rate corrected QT interval in our study population. We also evaluated
whether this association was modified by participants' oxidative stress
allelic profile, obesity

EP

and diabetes status, and current use of beta blockers, and examined
whether the association between PM and QTc varied across quantiles of
the QTc interval distribution using quantile regression.

C

METHODS

C

Study Population

Our analysis included 400 men enrolled in the Veterans Administration
Normative

A

Aging Study (NAS) with information regarding residential PM2.5
concentrations, QT duration measures, and all covariates of interest.
These participants underwent 610 study visits between January 14, 2003
and December 21, 2011. The NAS is a prospective cohort study, described
in detail previously.14 Briefly, this closed cohort was established in
1963 and originally enrolled 2,280 adult male volunteers

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

living in the Greater Boston area, who were free of chronic medical
conditions. Loss to follow-up has been mainly due to death or moving out
of the study area. There were 607 active NAS study participants during
the time period of

TE D

interest. Of these, 451 participants had complete information regarding
subchronic or long-term residential PM2.5 exposures and QTc measurements
for one or more study visits. Three participants were missing
information on cholesterol levels and one was missing information on
race. We also excluded 49 study

participants with atrial fibrillation, pacemakers or QRS interval
durations of 120

EP

ms or greater from the analysis, which brought the final sample size to
400.

Participants presented for 1-4 visits, with 27% (n=166) undergoing at
least two study visits.

C

We administered detailed questionnaires and physical examinations at all
center-based study visits, occurring every 3-5 years. Physical
examinations

C

included measurement of height and weight, which was used to calculate
body mass index (BMI). We used fasting blood samples to assess
cholesterol levels,15

A

and obtained smoking history from an American Thoracic Society (ATS)
questionnaire. We defined participants' diabetes status based on a
physician's diagnosis of type 2 diabetes, and/or use of diabetes
medication assessed during the physician interview. We also assessed use
of anti-hypertensive medications (ACE inhibitors, beta blockers, calcium
channel blockers, angiotensin receptor blockers,

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

and diuretics) during the physician interview. Finally, systolic and
diastolic blood pressure (SBP and DBP) were measured by a physician, and
mean arterial blood pressure was defined as DBP+1/3(SBP-DBP).

TE D

This study was approved by the Harvard School of Public Health and
Veteran Administration institutional review boards, and all participants
provided their written informed consent. QT Interval Duration

We measured heart rate variability between 5:30AM and 2:00PM using a
two-

EP

channel, five-lead ECG monitor (Trillium 30000; Forest Medical, East
Syracuse,

NY), as described in detail previously.16 QT duration was measured in
one of two leads using a Holter recorder. Participants rested for 5
minutes, and then remained

C

seated during the ECG, which was recorded at a sampling rate of 256 Hz
per channel for 5-10 minutes. QT intervals were measured in ms from the
onset of the

C

QRS to the end of the T-wave on normal or supraventricular beats, and
were not

A

calculated when the T-wave did not have sufficient amplitude. We
excluded participants with atrial fibrillation, pacemakers or QRS
intervals ≥120 ms from our analysis (49 participants, 92 study visits).
We calculated heart rate-corrected QT values, hereafter referred to as
QT, using Fridericia's formula.17 PM2.5 Exposure and Temperature

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

We estimated spatially and temporally resolved daily residential PM2.5
exposures (in μg/m3) at each participant's residence using a validated
hybrid exposure model, described in detail previously.18 This model
incorporated satellite based aerosol optical depth measurements as well
as land-use and meteorologic variables,

TE D

including temperature, wind speed, elevation, visibility, distance to
major roads,

percent of open space, population density, traffic density, proximity to
point source emissions, and area emissions (No2,So2, PM10,PM2.5). We
used a mixed model

approach by regressing daily PM2.5 against aerosol optical depth,
spatial predictors,

EP

and temporal predictors. For days when aerosol optical depth data were
not

available for some grid cells, we fit a generalized additive model with
a thin plate spline term of latitude and longitude to interpolate PM2.5.
Out of sample R2 for this model was 0.89 for daily data and 0.87 for
annual averages. We evaluated moving

C

averages of PM2.5 exposure at 3, 7, 21, 14, and 28 days as well as 1
year before

C

each visit. Although the focus of our study was sub-chronic and
long-term PM exposures, we also evaluated averages of PM2.5 for 1 and 2
days before each study

A

visit.

Apparent temperature, defined as a person's perceived air temperature in

ºC,19 was calculated using the following formula: -2.653 + (0.994*air
temperature)

-  (0.0153*dew-point temperature). We calculated moving averages of
   apparent

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

temperature corresponding to 3-28 days before each study visit, and
averaged outdoor temperature for the year before each visit. Oxidative
Stress Genetic Scores

TE D

We hypothesized that the PM-QT association may be mediated by an
oxidative stress-related mechanism. To evaluate this possibility, we
calculated oxidative

stress allelic profiles using a genetic score approach, in which
variants of oxidative defense genes were selected using the least
absolute shrinkage and selection

operator (Lasso) based on their association with 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine
levels

EP

(8-OhdG is a marker of oxidative DNA damage).20 The Lasso method
performs

variable selection and estimates regression coefficients by minimizing
the residual sum of squares given a constraint for the sum of the
absolute value of coefficients

C

in a regression model.21 The genetic variants used to calculate the
oxidative stress score were CAT (rs1001179, rs480575), GC (rs2282679),
GCLM (rs3170633),

C

HMOX1 (rs2071746, rs5995098), and NQO1 (rs1800566). We constructed
scores representing participants' allelic profiles by summing these
genetic variants, using

A

the signs of the coefficients of the Lasso penalization.20 Statistical
Analyses

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

We evaluated the association between standard deviation (SD) increases
in moving averages of PM2.5 exposure (1 day-1 year) and QT interval
duration in ms, using linear mixed models.

TE D

All models controlled for potential confounders, which we identified
through a literature search and chose on the basis of being related to
both air

pollution exposure and QT duration, as can be visualized using directed
acyclic graphs.22 These potential confounders are age (years), BMI (in
kg/m2), race

(White, Black, Hispanic [White], and Hispanic [Black]), total
cholesterol levels

EP

(mg/dL), smoking history (current, former, or never), current use of
anti-

hypertensive medications (ACE inhibitors, calcium channel blockers,
angiotensin receptor agonists, alpha blockers, or diuretics: yes/no),
diabetic status (based on

C

physician's diagnosis and/or use of diabetes medications: yes/no),
alcohol intake (≥ vs. < two drinks/day), season (indicated using the
sine and cosine of the date),

C

mean arterial pressure (mmHg), and moving averages of temperature
corresponding to the pollutant exposure duration of interest (using both
a linear

A

and quadratic term). We examined effect modification of the association
between 1-year PM2.5 exposure and QT duration by obesity (defined as BMI
≥ 30 kg/m2;

yes/no), diabetes (yes/no), current use of beta blockers (yes/no) and
oxidative stress allelic profile (high/low; dichotomized according to
the median score) using separated regression models. We also used
interaction terms in order to assess

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

effect modification. When assessing interactions with beta blocker use,
we adjusted for the individual anti-hypertensive medications listed
above rather than an aggregated anti-hypertensive medication use
variable.

TE D

We conducted a sensitivity analysis evaluating associations between
1-year PM2.5 exposure and QT, excluding participants with PM2.5 levels
above 12 μg/m3 (representing 4 participants and 10 visits). We did this
analysis in order to

examine the PM2.5-QT association only at pollutant exposure levels below
EPA air quality standards. In addition, we conducted sensitivity
analysis which accounted

EP

for possible survivor bias using inverse probability weighting. We
modeled the

probability of returning for a visit based on variables available at
previous visits, including QT duration. The observations were given
weights of one for the first

C

visit, the inverse of the probability of returning for the second visit,
the product of the inverse of the probabilities of returning for the
second and third visits, etc. An

C

additional sensitivity analysis restricted main effects and
gene-environment interaction analyses to White participants.

A

Finally, we evaluated whether 1-year PM2.5 exposure was associated with

QT duration at different percentiles of the QT distribution using
quantile regression for longitudinal visits.23 Instead of asking for the
association between exposure

and the average response, such analyses capture whether the shape of the
distribution of QT in the population is changed, rather than just
shifted, and if so,

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

which part of the distribution is most affected. Specifically, we
evaluated this association at the 10th, 20th, 30th, 40th, 50th, 60th,
70th, 80th, and 90th percentiles of QTc. We conducted analyses using SAS
versions 9.3 and 9.4 (SAS Corporation,

TE D

Cary, NC), and R version 3.1.1. RESULTS

We report participants' characteristics at their baseline visit in Table
1. Briefly,

participants presented with a mean age of 76 years, most were current or
former smokers, 21% had diabetes, and 26% had a BMI over 30 kg/m2.

EP

We present residential PM2.5 concentrations for the averaging periods of
1

day to 1 year across all study visits in Table 2. For example, average
1-year PM2.5 exposure was 9.8 μg/m3 (interquartile range: 1.9 μg/m3,
5th-95th percentiles: 7.8-12

C

μg/m3).

C

We present associations between moving averages of PM2.5 exposure levels
and QT interval duration in Table 3. We observed positive associations
between

A

increased sub-chronic and long-term PM2.5 exposure and QT duration.
These

associations were of greatest magnitude for longer-term exposures,
although the trend wasn't linear. For example, 1-SD increases in PM2.5
exposure were associated with a 2.1 ms increase in QT (95% CI: -2.4,
6.7) for a 3 day moving average, a 3.7 ms increase in QT (95% CI: -1.0,
8.3) for a 14 day moving average,

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

a 7.0 increase (95% CI: 2.3, 12) for a 28 day moving average, and a 6.3
ms increase (95% CI: 1.8, 11) for a 1 year moving average. Standard
deviation increases in 1 and 2 day PM2.5 exposures were associated with
1.7 and 2.3 ms increases in QT, respectively. The association between
1-year PM2.5 and QT was

TE D

not changed materially by excluding participants with annual PM2.5
measurements above EPA air quality standards (6.6 vs. 6.3 ms; data not
shown). Inverse

probability weighting likewise did not appreciably alter main effects
results, nor did limiting analyses to White participants only (data not
shown).

EP

We present quantile regression results in Supplemental Table 1. We

observed a consistent change in QT interval duration of a bit under 6 ms
at every decile of the QT distribution. For example, a SD increase in
PM2.5 was associated with a 5.9 ms increase in QT at the 10th percentile
of exposure (95% CI: 1.2, 11),

C

and a 5.8 ms increase in QT duration at the 90th percentile (95% CI:
1.1, 11).

C

Finally, we report associations between 1-year PM2.5 exposure and QT
interval duration stratified by obesity and diabetes status, current
beta blocker use,

A

and oxidative stress genetic score in Table 4. We found some limited
evidence for interactions between oxidative stress allelic profile and
PM2.5 exposure in relation

to QT duration. Specifically, among those with low allelic risk
profiles, a 1-SD increase in PM2.5 exposure was associated with a 3.1 ms
increase in QT duration (95% CI: -3.7, 9.8), whereas among those with a
high oxidative allelic risk profile,

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

the same exposure increment was related to a larger increase in QT
duration (8.5 ms, 95% CI: 1.9, 15; p for interaction = 0.25). Results
were similar when restricting this analysis to White participants (data
not shown). We also observed a somewhat stronger association between
PM2.5 and QT among participants who

TE D

were not taking beta blockers (6.5 ms, 95% CI: 0.14, 13), compared with
current beta blocker users (2.1 ms, 95% CI: -4.7, 9.0; p-interaction =
0.34). The

association between PM2.5 level and QT duration was very similar when
stratified by diabetes or obesity status (Table 4).

EP

DISCUSSION

We report positive associations between sub-chronic and long-term PM2.5
exposure and increased corrected QT duration, a risk factor for
arrhythmia and cardiac death,

C

in a cohort of elderly men. Effect estimates were strongest when
evaluating longer-term moving averages of exposure, and among
participants with a high

C

oxidative stress allelic profile. The observed associations reflect
PM2.5 levels that are consistently at or below EPA standards. Our
results suggest that particulate

A

pollution is associated with increased risk of adverse cardiovascular
events in part through changes in ventricular repolarization, and that
these associations are stronger among people with higher genetic
susceptibility to oxidative stress.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

A small number of studies previously explored the association between
particulate air pollution and QT duration. These studies reported
associations between short-term particulate levels and increased QT
duration in both people and animals,7,11,12 though a previous NAS
analysis which evaluated exposures up to 10

TE D

hours before the study visit reported associations only with black
carbon (rather than PM2.5 as a whole).24 A large cross-sectional study
reported a positive association between long-term PM2.5 exposure and QT
prolongation.13

Our analysis confirms an association between long term PM2.5 exposure
and

EP

QT, and extends the literature by using a longitudinal study design with
repeated visits and by examining sub-chronic exposure periods. We also
examined the PM2.5-QT association at different percentiles of QT
duration, whereas epidemiologic studies generally evaluate changes in
the mean outcome and may

C

therefore miss associations in tails of the outcome distribution.25 Our
results

C

indicate that the association between PM2.5 exposure and QT interval
duration is stable across percentiles of the QT distribution, and the QT
interval distribution is

A

therefore shifted rather than changed in relation to pollutant exposure.
Ours is also the first study to evaluate interactions between long-term
PM2.5 exposure and oxidative stress genes, obesity, and beta blocker use
in relation to QT, and the first to evaluate the association between
long-term PM2.5 and QT among the elderly, a sub-population particularly
vulnerable to pollutant-induced health effects.2 The

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

demonstration that long term exposure is associated with changes in QT
is important because the studies showing QT associated with increased
risk of subsequent arrhythmias interpret the longer QT as a relatively
stable, long-term risk factor for the events. If long-term averages of
PM2.5 are stronger predictors of

TE D

QT than short term, this suggests that the long-term exposure is
producing

precisely the chronic effects on QT that are risk factors for
cardiovascular events. Potential mechanisms underlying the observed
associations include a

particulate-induced increase in pulmonary oxidative stress, which can in
turn

EP

induce pro-inflammatory cytokines.26 Particles can also induce oxidative
stress and inflammation directly in the vasculature and myocardial
substrate.27 Furthermore, epidemiologic studies, including one in the
NAS cohort, link PM exposure to methylation changes in the inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)

C

gene, which helps to regulate the inflammatory response.28,29 Increased
pro-

C

inflammatory signals and oxidative stress can alter cardiac autonomic
control,27 causing a prolonged period of ventricular polarization via
changes in sodium and

A

calcium channels.30.31 Oxidative stress also inhibits nitric oxide
production,32

which could lead to changes in cardiac autonomic control, thereby
triggering QT prolongation.33

We observed some limited evidence for modification of the relation
between PM2.5 and QT by oxidative stress genetic score, with somewhat
stronger

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

associations among participants with a high rather than low oxidative
stress allelic profile. This result is consistent with a previous NAS
study of short-term black carbon (BC) exposure and QT duration,24 and
with earlier reports of oxidative stress genes modifying pollutant
effects on heart rate variability.34,35 As discussed

TE D

above, probable mechanisms underlying the association between
particulate air pollution and QT duration are heavily based on increases
in oxidative stress.2 Thus, genetic variants affecting reactive oxygen
species formation and anti-

oxidative defenses are expected to modify the PM2.5-QT association.
Nevertheless,

EP

our study's finding is modest and could be due to chance. Therefore, our
result should be replicated in future studies, and then examined in
light of the overall literature.

C

We also report some weak evidence of modification by beta blocker use,
with somewhat larger effect estimates among those not currently using
these

C

medications. A possible causal mechanism underlying this finding
involves effects of beta blockers on improved cardiac autonomic
control.36 However, we should

A

note that the close association between medication use and hypertension
limits interpretability of our results, which could also be due to
chance. Our results are not suggestive of effect modification by obesity
or diabetes on the association between PM2.5 and QT. We expected to
observe interactions

because people with diabetes and obesity have elevated baseline
oxidative stress

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

levels and both conditions may be associated with increased QT
duration.37-39 Our current findings are also inconsistent with a
previous NAS study regarding shortterm BC exposure and QT duration.24 It
should be noted that our study did not have sufficient power to examine
effect modification in an optimal way, nor did

TE D

we have the statistical power to examine three-way interactions, and
larger studies will be needed in the future in order to examine the
possibility of susceptible subgroups more thoroughly.

We acknowledge several other limitations of our study, including
potential

EP

exposure misclassification of pollutant estimates. The limitation is
reduced by the fact that we estimated individualized residential PM2.5
exposures using a sophisticated, spatially and temporally resolved
hybrid satellite based and land-use

C

model, which is likely to reduce misclassification relative to fixed
monitoring studies. Furthermore, pollutant measurement error from
spatio-temporal models is

C

likely to be of the Berkson type, which decreases precision without
biasing effect size.40

A

An additional limitation was our use of a lower than normal sampling
rate of

256 Hz. This was the standard at the time these recordings were made and
is still used by many clinical laboratories. Currently, a sampling rate
of 1,000 Hz is considered preferable by most researchers and our lower
sampling rate could lead to non-differential measurement error and
contribute to a possible false negative

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

finding. We also used a variable recording duration, though the
sampling timeframe in our study was longer than the standard. The
changes in QT duration that we observed do not rise to a level requiring

TE D

a clinical response.41 However, shifting the distribution of QT interval
duration may be of public health, rather than individual, concern.42
Furthermore, PM2.5

levels in the Boston area are generally below current EPA air quality
standards. Other areas, especially in developing nations, may have
consistently higher

pollutant levels, which could affect ventricular repolarization more
strongly.

EP

Finally, part of our goal was to identify mechanisms mediating the
association

between particulate pollutant exposure and adverse cardiovascular
outcomes, and these results indicate that disturbance of cardiac
repolarization may be part of that

C

pathway.

A key factor in our ability to address the study question was
development of

C

a spatio-temporal model for daily exposure at the address of
participants, due to the inclusion of satellite remote sensing data into
the model, in contrast to exposures

A

based solely on land use regression. While exposure was only estimated
at the residence of participants, our subjects are elderly and for the
most part no longer working.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Because the NAS comprises elderly, primarily Caucasian men, results may
not be generalizable to other segments of the population. Our findings,
however, are consistent with those of a large study conducted among a
younger population

TE D

of both men and women.13 Strengths of our study include access to a
large, general population

longitudinal cohort with extensive and repeated information regarding
PM2.5

exposures, potential confounders and effect modifiers, and QT data from
multiple study visits. The QT interval was measured using a computer
algorithm, which

EP

likely decreased measurement errors relative to manual measurement.

Furthermore, longer-term rather than short-term exposures may be of most
interest when assessing risk for chronic disease and dysfunction. Hence,
an additional strength of our study was the reconstruction of
participants' sub-chronic and long-

C

term PM2.5 exposures.18 Finally, our use of oxidative stress genetic
scores,

C

designed in relation to their association with a valid marker of
oxidative stress (8OHdG), allowed us to reduce the number of statistical
comparisons while

A

examining the biological mechanisms potentially underlying the PM2.5-QT
interval association.

Conclusions

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

We report positive associations between sub-chronic and long-term PM2.5
exposures and QT interval duration, which may be strongest for
longer-term exposures and among those with higher oxidative stress
allelic profiles. Changes in ventricular repolarization may mediate
associations between particle exposures

TE D

and adverse cardiovascular outcomes, and assessing longer-term exposures
is important to understanding effects of air pollution on chronic
disease and

dysfunction. Our main effects results are similar to previous studies
evaluating

short-term particulate exposure,7,11 and with one previous
cross-sectional study of

EP

long-term exposure,13 but extend the literature by examining
interactions between long-term PM exposure and oxidative stress genes
and by using a longitudinal, repeated-measures design when assessing
long-term exposures. Future high-

powered studies should further evaluate associations between longer-term
pollutant

C

exposures and QT duration, including with respect to identifying
susceptible

A

C

subgroups.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

REFERENCES 1) Brook RD. 2008. Cardiovascular effects of air pollution.
Clin Sci 115(6):175187.

TE D

2) Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA 3rd, et al. 2010. Particulate matter
   air pollution and cardiovascular disease: An update to the scientific
   statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation
   12:2331--2378.

3) Kim JY, Mukherjee S, Ngo LC, et al. 2004. Urinary 8-hydroxy-2′-

deoxyguanosine as a biomarker of oxidative DNA damage in workers exposed
to

EP

fine particulates. Environ Health Perspect 112:666--671.

4) Nel A. 2005. Air pollution-related illness: effects of particles.
   Science.

C

308(5723):804--806.

5) Gold DR, Litonjua A, Schwartz J, et al. 2000. Ambient pollution and
   heart rate

C

variability. Circulation 101:1267--1273. 6) O'Neill MS, Veves A, Sarnat
JA, et al. 2007. Air pollution and inflammation in

A

type 2 diabetes: a mechanism of susceptibility. Occup Environ Med
64(6):373-- 379.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

7) Hennenberger A, Zareba W, Ibald-Mulli A, et al. 2005. Repolarization
changes induced by air pollution in ischemic heart disease patients.
Environ Health Perspect 113:440-446.

225. 

TE D

8) Scott JL, Walls RM. 1985. QT interval prolongation. J Emerg Med
   3(3):221--

9) Straus SM, Kors JA, De Bruin ML, et al. 2006. Prolonged QTc interval
   and risk of sudden cardiac death in a population of older adults. J
   Am Coll Cardiol. 47(2):362--367.

EP

10) Schwartz J. 1994. What are people dying of on high air pollution
    days? Environ Res 64:26-35.

11) Lux RL, Pope CA. 2009. Air pollution effects on ventricular

C

repolarization. Res Rep Health Eff Inst 3--28. Research Report 141.

C

12) Kim JB, Kim C, Choi E, et al. 2012. Particulate air pollution
    induces arrhythmia via oxidative stress and calcium calmodulin
    kinase II activation.

A

Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 259(1):66-73. 13) Van Hee VC, Szpiro AA, Prineas
R, et al. 2011. Association of long-term air pollution with ventricular
conduction and repolarization abnormalities. Epidemiology 22(6):773-780.
14) Bell B, Rose C, Damon A. 1972. The Normative Aging Study: an

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

interdisciplinary and longitudinal study of health and aging. Aging Hum
Dev 3:4-- 17. 15) Peters JL, Kubzansky LD, Ikeda A, et al. 2012. Lead
concentrations in relation

TE D

to multiple biomarkers of cardiovascular disease: the Normative Aging
Study. Environ Health Perspect 120(3):361-366.

16) Park SK, O'Neill MS, Vokonas PS, et al. 2005. Effects of air
    pollution on heart rate variability: the VA Normative Aging Study.
    Environ Health Perspect 113(3):304-309.

EP

17) Fridericia LS. 1920. The duration of systole in the
    electrocardiogram of normal subjects and of patients with heart
    disease. Acta Medica Scandinavica 53:469-486.
18) Kloog I, Chudnovsky A, Just A, et al. 2014. A New Hybrid
    Spatio-Temporal

C

Model For Estimating Daily Multi-Year PM2.5 Concentrations Across
Northeastern USA Using High Resolution Aerosol Optical Depth Data.

C

Atmospheric Environment 95:581-590.

A

19) O'Neill MS, Zanobetti A, Schwartz J. 2003. Modifiers of the
    temperature and mortality association in seven US cities. Am J
    Epidemiol 157:1074--1082.
20) Bind MA, Coull B, Suh H, et al. 2014. A novel genetic score approach
    using instruments to investigate interactions between pathways and
    environment: application to air pollution. PloS One 9(4):e96000.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

21) Tibshirani R. 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection via the
lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 58:267--288 22) Shrier
I, Platt RW. 2008. Reducing bias through directed acyclic graphs. BMC

TE D

Med Res Methodol, 8:70. 23) Koenker R. 2004. Quantile regression for
longitudinal data. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 91(1):74.

24) Baja ES, Schwartz JD, Wellenius GA, et al. 2010. Traffic-related air
    pollution and QT interval: modification by diabetes, obesity, and
    oxidative stress gene

118(6):840-846.

EP

polymorphisms in the Normative Aging Study. Environ Health Perspect

25) Bind MA, Coull BA, Peters A, et al. 2014b. Beyond the mean: quantile

C

regression to explore the air pollution effect on gene-specific DNA
methylation in the Normative Aging Study [Abstract]. In: Environ Health
Perspect. Available:

C

http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/ehbasel13/p-2-26-03/ [accessed 19 September
2014].

A

26) Donaldson K, Stone V. 2003. Current hypotheses on the mechanisms of
    toxicity of ultrafine particles. Ann Ist Super Sanita 39(3):405-410.
27) Simkhovich BZ, Kleinman MT, Kloner RA. 2008. Air pollution and
    cardiovascular injury epidemiology, toxicology, and mechanisms. J Am
    Coll Cardiol 52(9):719-726.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

28) Madrigano J, Baccarelli A, Mittleman MA, et al. 2012. Air pollution
and DNA methylation: interaction by psychological factors in the VA
Normative Aging Study. Am J Epidemiol 176(3):224-232.

TE D

29) Tarantini L, Bonzini M, Apostoli P, et al. 2009. Effects of
    particulate matter on genomic DNA methylation content and iNOS
    promoter methylation. Environ Health Perspect 117(2):217-222.

30) Moss AJ, Kass RS. 2005. Long QT syndrome: from channels to cardiac
    arrhythmias. J Clin Invest 115(8):2018-2024.

EP

31) Utell MJ, Frampton MW, Zareba W, et al. 2002. Cardiovascular effects

associated with air pollution: potential mechanisms and methods of
testing. Inhal Toxicol 14(12):1231-1247.

C

32) Bai Y, Suzuki AK, Sagai M. 2001. The cytotoxic effects of diesel
    exhaust

C

particles on human pulmonary artery endothelial cells in vitro: role of
active oxygen species. Free Radic Biol Med 30(5):555-562.

A

33) Tsuji H, Larson MG, Venditti FJ, et al. 1996. Impact of reduced
    heart rate variability on risk for cardiac events. The Framingham
    Heart Study. Circulation 94(11):2850-2855.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

34) Chahine T, Baccarelli A, Litonjua A, et al. 2007. Particulate air
pollution, oxidative stress genes, and heart rate variability in an
elderly cohort. Environ Health Perspect 12:1617--1622

TE D

35) Schwartz J, Park SK, O'Neill MS, et al. 2005.
    Glutathione-S-transferase M1, obesity, statins, and autonomic
    effects of particles: gene-by-drug-by-environment interaction. Am J
    Respir Crit Care Med 172(12):1529-1533.

36) Lanza GA, Pitocco D, Navarese EP, et al. 2007. Association between
    cardiac

autonomic dysfunction and inflammation in type 1 diabetic patients:
effect of beta-

EP

blockade. Eur Heart J 28(7):814-820.

37) Virgolici B, Mohora M, Stoian I, et al. 2005. A comparative
    oxidative stress study -- obesity with and without diabetes
    mellitus. Rom J Intern Med 43(3-4):261-

C

268. 

C

38) El-Gamal A, Gallagher D, Nawras A, et al. 1995. Effects of obesity
    of QT, RR, and QTc intervals. Am J Cardiol 75(14):956-959.

A

39) Veglio M, Bruno G, Borra M, et al. 2002. Prevalence of increased QT
    interval duration and dispersion in type 2 diabetic patients and its
    relationship with coronary heart disease: a population-based cohort.
    J Intern Med 251(4):317-324.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

40) Zeger SL, Thomas D, Dominici F, et al. 2000. Exposure measurement
error in time-series studies of air pollution: concepts and
consequences. Environ Health Perspect 108:419-426.

TE D

41) Newton-Cheh C, Shah R. 2007. Genetic determinants of QT interval
    variation and sudden cardiac death. Curr Opin Genet Dev
    17(3):213--221.

42) Doyle YG, Furey A, Flowers J. 2006. Sick individuals and sick
    populations: 20

A

C

C

EP

years later. J Epidemiol Community Health 60(5):396-398.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Table 1. Characteristics of participants at baseline (n=400), Normative
Aging Study (2003-2011). Mean (SD)

Age (years) Race

76 (6)

White Black Hispanic (White) Hispanic (Black) Body mass index (kg/m2)
Obesity

387 (97) 9 (2) 3 (0.75) 1 (0.25)

28 (4)

EP

Yes No

Total cholesterol (mg/dL) Smoking

N (%)

TE D

Study variable

181 (36)

C

Never smoker Former smoker Current smoker

Mean arterial pressure (mmHg)

A

C

Anti-hypertensive medicine use (n [%]) Yes No Season Spring (March-May)
Summer (June-August) Fall (September-November) Winter
(December-February)

103 (26) 297 (74)

119 (30) 270 (68) 11 (3)

88 (11) 272 (68) 128 (32) 79 (20) 106 (27) 134 (34) 81 (20)

Alcohol intake <2 drinks per day 2+ drinks per day

320 (80) 80 (20)

Diabetes

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Yes No

83 (21) 317 (79)

Low High

126 (39) 201 (61)

Oxidative stress gene score

(2003-2011).

TE D

Table 2. Study participants' PM2.5 exposure distributions, Normative
Aging Study

N visits

Mean (SD)

5th-95th percentiles

Interquart ile range

1 day

608

9.9 (5.6)

3.4-20

6.8

EP

PM2.5 moving averages (µg/m3)

2 days

609

9.5 (4.7)

3.8-20

5.5

609

9.4 (4.0)

4.3-18

4.8

608

9.5 (3.1)

5.3-16

4.0

609

9.6 (2.7)

5.9-15

3.8

606

9.6 (2.5)

6.1-14

3.5

28 days

603

9.6 (2.4)

6.3-14

3.4

1 year

528

9.8 (1.3)

7.8-12

1.9

3 days

14 days

A

C

21 days

C

7 days

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Table 3. Mixed linear effects models estimating the change in heart
rate-corrected QT interval duration associated with 1 standard deviation
increases in PM2.5;

TE D

Normative Aging Study, 2003-2011.a

Change in QTc (ms)

95% confidence interval

1 day

608

1.7

-2.9, 6.3

2 days

609

2.3

-2.3, 6.7

3 days

609

2.1

-2.4, 6.7

7 days 14 days 21 days

5.1

0.55, 9.7

609

3.7

-1.0, 8.3

606

5.8

1.2, 11

603

7.0

2.3, 12

528

6.3

1.8, 11

C

1 year

608

C

28 days

EP

N visits

Exposure duration

A

1. Models are adjusted for age, race, BMI, cholesterol, smoking history,
   current use of anti-hypertensive medications, diabetic status,
   alcohol intake, season, mean arterial pressure, and moving averages
   of temperature corresponding to the PM2.5 exposure duration of
   interest (using linear and quadratic terms).

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

TE D EP C C A Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights
reserved. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Table 4. Modification of the association between a standard deviation
increase in the 1-year moving average of PM2.5 exposure and heart
rate-corrected QT

Characteristics Oxidative stress genetic score < Oxidative stress
genetic score > median P for interaction Not obeseb Obese

Change in QTc in ms (95% CI)

153 287

3.1 (-3.7, 9.8) 8.5 (1.9, 15) 0.25

6.1 (1.0, 11) 7.1 (-4.0, 18) 0.55

EP

P for interaction

N visits

392 136

P for interaction No diabetes Diabetes

TE D

durationa; Normative Aging Study, 2003-2011.

C

No current beta blocker usec Current beta blocker use

P for interaction

426 102

6.2 (1.4, 11) 6.0 (-7.5, 20) 0.83

294 234

6.5 (0.14, 13) 2.1 (-4.7, 9.0) 0.34

C

1. Models are adjusted for age, race, BMI, cholesterol, smoking history,
   current use of anti-hypertensive medications, diabetic status,
   alcohol intake, season, mean

A

arterial pressure, and moving averages of temperature corresponding to
the PM2.5 exposure duration of interest (using linear and quadratic
terms). b. Models assessing interactions with obesity exclude BMI.

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

c. Models assessing interactions with beta blocker use adjust for
individual antihypertensive medications (ACE inhibitors, calcium channel
blockers, angiotensin receptor agonists, alpha blockers, and diuretics),
rather than a combined anti-

TE D

hypertensive medication use variable.

Supplemental Table 1. Quantile regression models estimating changes in
heart

rate-corrected QT duration associated with a standard deviation increase
in 1-year

Change in QTc (ms)

95% confidence interval

5.9

1.2, 11

C

EP

PM2.5 over 528 visits; Normative Aging Study, 2003-2011.a

5.9

1.2, 11

5.9

1.2, 11

40th percentile

5.9

1.2, 11

50th percentile

5.9

1.2, 11

60th percentile

5.9

1.2, 11

70th percentile

5.9

1.2, 11

80th percentile

5.9

1.2, 11

90th percentile

5.8

1.1, 11

Quantile of QTc distribution

10th percentile 20th percentile

A

C

30th percentile

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

a. Models are adjusted for age, race, body mass index, cholesterol
levels, smoking history, current use of anti-hypertensive medications,
diabetic status, alcohol

TE D

intake, season, mean arterial pressure, and moving averages of
temperature

corresponding to the PM2.5 exposure duration of interest (using linear
and quadratic

A

C

C

EP

terms).

Copyright © Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.


