Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87 DOI
10.1186/s12940-015-0074-z

RESEARCH

Open Access

Exposure to sub-chronic and long-term particulate air pollution and
heart rate variability in an elderly cohort: the Normative Aging Study
Irina Mordukhovich1*, Brent Coull2, Itai Kloog1,3, Petros Koutrakis1,
Pantel Vokonas4 and Joel Schwartz5

Abstract Background: Short-term particulate air pollution exposure is
associated with reduced heart rate variability (HRV), a risk factor for
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, in many studies. Associations
with sub-chronic or long-term exposures, however, have been sparsely
investigated. We evaluated the effect of fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
and black carbon (BC) exposures on HRV in an elderly cohort: the
Normative Aging Study. Methods: We measured power in high frequency (HF)
and low frequency (LF), standard deviation of normal-tonormal intervals
(SDNN), and the LF:HF ratio among participants from the Greater Boston
area. Residential BC exposures for 540 men (1161 study visits,
2000--2011) were estimated using a spatio-temporal land use regression
model, and residential PM2.5 exposures for 475 men (992 visits,
2003--2011) were modeled using a hybrid satellite based and land-use
model. We evaluated associations between moving averages of sub-chronic
(3--84 day) and long-term (1 year) pollutant exposure estimates and HRV
parameters using linear mixed models. Results: One-standard deviation
increases in sub-chronic, but not long-term, BC were associated with
reduced HF, LF, and SDNN and an increased LF:HF ratio (e.g., 28 day BC:
−2.3 % HF [95 % CI:−4.6, −0.02]). Sub-chronic and long-term PM2.5 showed
evidence of relations to an increased LF and LF:HF ratio (e.g., 1 year
PM: 21.0 % LF:HF [8.6, 34.8]), but not to HF or SDNN, though the effect
estimates were very imprecise and mostly spanned the null. Conclusions:
We observed some evidence of a relation between longer-term BC and PM2.5
exposures and changes in HRV in an elderly cohort. While previous
studies focused on short-term air pollution exposures, our results
suggest that longer-term exposures may influence cardiac autonomic
function. Keywords: Epidemiology, Heart rate variability, Air pollution,
Particulate matter

Background Particulate air pollution exposure is associated with
cardiovascular mortality and morbidity in a multitude of epidemiologic
studies, including at levels at or below EPA standards [1, 2]. Pathways
potentially mediating this association include induction of systemic
inflammation [3, 4] and oxidative stress [5, 6], as well as changes in

-  Correspondence: imordukh@hsph.harvard.edu 1 Exposure, Epidemiology
   and Risk Program, Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School
   of Public Health, Landmark Center, 401 Park Dr, Boston, MA 02215, USA
   Full list of author information is available at the end of the
   article

ion channel function in myocardial cells [7] or cardiac autonomic
function [8--10]. Heart rate variability (HRV) is a marker of cardiac
autonomic control, which reflects autonomic modulation of the rhythmic
activity of the sinus node [11]. Reduced HRV is predictive of increased
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality risk [12, 13]. Short-term
particulate air pollution exposure is associated with reduced HRV in
many epidemiologic studies, including a recent meta-analysis [14] and
within the current study population [10, 15]. Associations are
particularly pronounced among the elderly [16], among those with
preexisting cardiovascular disease or diabetes [17], or among people

© 2015 Mordukhovich et al. Open Access This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes
were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data
made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

with reduced antioxidative defenses [17, 18]. However, the association
between exposure to sub-chronic or chronic air pollution exposure and
HRV is unclear, although long-term exposure is known to have a stronger
effect on cardiovascular mortality than acute exposure [19]. Also, many
previous studies have used air pollution at a central site as the
exposure metric, introducing potential exposure error. Particulate
matter is a complex mixture of particles and liquids, traffic and
non-traffic components, and varies in composition across geographic
regions [1]. Studies to date suggest that traffic-related particulate
pollution may contribute significantly to cardiovascular outcomes [17,
20], including changes in HRV [19]. In the current study, we used
address-specific estimates of exposure and evaluated whether sub-chronic
(3--84 day) and long-term (1 year) exposure to ambient particulate
matter <2.5 μm in aerodynamic diameter (PM2.5) or black carbon (BC), a
marker for traffic related air pollution, would be associated with
reduced HRV in a cohort of elderly men. In addition to examining the
main effect of particulate air pollution on HRV, we also evaluated
potential modification by oxidative stress allelic profile,
hypertension, obesity and diabetes.

Methods Study population

Our analysis included 540 men enrolled in the Veterans Administration
Normative Aging Study (NAS) who had complete information regarding
ambient BC concentrations, HRV measures, and all covariates of interest,
and who underwent 1161 study visits between November 14, 2000 and
August, 24, 2011. We also evaluated a largely overlapping group of 475
participants with complete information regarding PM2.5 concentrations
and all covariates, who presented for 992 study visits between January
14, 2003 and December 21, 2011. The NAS is a prospective cohort study,
described in detail previously [21]. Briefly, this closed cohort was
established in 1963 and enrolled 2280 adult male volunteers, free of
chronic medical conditions, who were living in the Greater Boston area.
Detailed questionnaires and physical examinations were administered at
all center-based study visits, occurring every 3--5 years. Loss to
follow-up has been predominantly due to death or moving out of the study
area. There were 727 active NAS study participants during the time
period of interest. Of these, 596 participants had complete information
regarding sub-chronic or long-term residential BC exposures and HRV
measures for one or more study visits, and 540 had complete information
regarding PM2.5 exposures and HRV measurements. We excluded study
participants with problematic heart rate measurements from the analysis
(as described

Page 2 of 10

below, n = 56 for BC and n = 65 for PM2.5), which brought the final
sample size to 540 for BC and 475 for PM2.5. Participants presented for
1--4 visits, with 65.6 % (n = 354) undergoing at least two study visits
for BC and 65.1 % (n = 309) for PM2.5. Physical examinations included
measurement of height and weight, which was used to calculate body mass
index (BMI, in kg/m2). Blood samples were collected to assess fasting
blood glucose (FBG) levels. Smoking history was obtained via an American
Thoracic Society questionnaire. Participants' diabetes status was
assessed based on a physician's diagnosis of type 2 diabetes, and/ or
use or diabetes medication assessed during the physician interview.
Similarly, hypertension was defined as a measured systolic blood
pressure (SBP) of ≥140 mmHg, a measured diastolic blood pressure (DBP)
of ≥90 mm Hg, or participant use of anti-hypertensive medication. SBP
and DBP were measured by a physician, and mean arterial blood pressure
(MAP) was defined as DBP + 1/3(SBP-DBP). Finally, room temperature was
recorded at the time of electrocardiogram (ECG) measurement. This study
was approved by the Harvard School of Public Health and Veteran
Administration institutional review boards, and all participants
provided their written informed consent. To summarize, all participants
were administered questionnaires and were examined by a physician at
each study visit. These examinations included measurement of heart rate
variability, described below. Outdoor temperature and residential air
pollution exposure estimates were also evaluated for several time
periods preceding a participants' study visit and are described below.
Heart rate variability

HRV was measured between 6:00 AM and 1:00 PM using a two-channel,
five-lead ECG monitor (Trillium 30,000; Forest Medical, East Syracuse,
NY), as described in detail previously [10, 22]. Briefly, participants
rested for 5 min, and then remained seated during the ECG, which was
recorded at a sampling rate of 256 Hz per channel for approximately 7
min. Heart rate and HRV measures were then calculated using PC-based
software (Trillium 3000 PC Companion Software for MS Windows; Forest
Medical, East Syracuse, NY) and reviewed by an experienced scanner to
correct for any errors. The following HRV measures were computed:
high-frequency power (HF; 0.15--0.4 Hz), low-frequency power (LF; 0.04--
0.15 Hz), LF:HF ratio, and the standard deviation of normal-to-normal
intervals (SDNN). HF is a marker of parasympathetic drive, LF is a
marker of both sympathetic and para-sympathetic activity, and the LF:HF
ratio reflects the balance of sympathetic and para-sympathetic systems
and may also be influenced by baroreflexes. In contrast to the latter
frequency domain measures, SDNN is a time

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

domain measure that reflects the variability in N-N interval duration.
As mentioned above, participants with problematic heart rate
measurements (i.e., atrial fibrillation, atrial bigeminy/trigeminy,
pacemakers, irregular rhythm, irregular sinus rhythm, frequent
ventricular ectopic activity, ventricular bigeminy, multifocal atrial
tachycardia, or a measurement time of less than 3.5 min) were excluded
from our analysis. Air pollution and weather

Daily BC exposures at participants' residences in the greater Boston
area was estimated using a validated spatio-temporal land-use regression
model [23]. Daily BC predictions were obtained using estimates averaged
from 148 monitoring sites, local meteorological conditions, land use
variables (including traffic density), day of the week, and other
factors [24]. Spatially-resolved daily residential PM2.5 exposures were
also estimated at each residence using a validated hybrid exposure
model, which incorporated satellite based aerosol optical depth (AOD)
measurements as well as land-use and meteorological variables (i.e.,
outdoor temperature, elevation, visibility, wind speed, distance to
major roads, percent of open space, traffic density, proximity to point
emissions, and area emissions). More in depth details can be found in
Kloog et al. [25]. For this study, we evaluated moving averages of
pollutant exposure at 3, 7, 21, 14, 28, 56 and 84 days as well as 1 year
prior to each study visit. Specifically, we calculated each
participant's average pollutant exposure level during a given number of
a days before each study visit. We also calculated BC and PM2.5 levels 1
and 2 days prior to the study visits, for use in sensitivity analyses.
Our regression models accounted for both room temperature and outdoor
temperature. Apparent temperature is defined as a person's perceived
outdoor temperature in °C ([26, 27], and calculated using the following
formula: −2.653 + (0.994 * air temperature) + (0.0153 * dew-point
temperature)). We calculated moving averages of apparent temperature,
corresponding to 1--28 days before each study visit. Measured outdoor
temperature was also averaged during the two months, three months, and
one year preceding each study visit. Oxidative stress genetic scores

Oxidative stress allelic profiles were calculated using a genetic score
approach [28], in which genetic variants were selected using the least
absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso) based on their
relation to 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine levels (8-OhdG, a marker of
oxidative DNA damage) [28]. The genetic variants used to calculate
oxidative stress score were CAT (rs1001179, rs480575), GC (rs2282679),
GCLM (rs3170633), HMOX1 (rs2071746, rs5995098), and NQO1 (rs1800566).
Scores

Page 3 of 10

representing participants' allelic profiles were constructed by summing
these genetic variants, using the signs of the coefficients of the Lasso
penalization [28]. Statistical analyses

We evaluated the association between one standard deviation (SD)
increases in moving averages of BC and PM2.5 exposure estimates (3
days-1 year) and several HRV measures (HF, LF, LF:HF, and SDNN), using
linear mixed models with random intercepts and a compoundsymmetry
covariance structure in a repeated measures study. The outcome of
interest was percent change in HRV, which was calculated as
[10(β*SD)-1]/100 %; 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated as
[10[SD/(β±1.96/SE)]-1]/100 %, where SE is the standard error associated
with the regression coefficient β [10]. Measures of HRV were
log-transformed to improve normality and stabilize the variance. All
models controlled for potential confounders, which were identified
following a thorough literature search: age, BMI, FBG, smoking history
(current, former, or never), current use of anti-hypertensive
medications (yes/no), room temperature at the time of ECG measurement,
season (indicated using the sine and cosine of the date), MAP, and
moving averages of outdoor temperature corresponding to the pollutant
exposure measurement interval of interest (using both a linear and
quadratic term). Because of previous research indicating potentially
susceptible subgroups [10, 15], we examined effect modification of the
association between 28 day exposure to BC and HRV parameters by obesity
(defined as BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2; yes/no), hypertension (yes/no), diabetes
(yes/ no) and oxidative stress allelic profile (high/low; dichotomized
based on median score) using separated linear regression models. We also
included multiplicative interaction terms in regression models to
evaluate effect modification. We conducted all analyses using SAS
versions 9.3 and 9.4. Survivor bias

Because people who did not return for subsequent visits are likely to
have been less healthy than those who did, this study, like all
longitudinal cohorts, can suffer from a dynamic selection bias. To
counteract this, we used inverse probability weighting. Specifically, we
modeled the probability of returning for a visit based on variables
available at previous visits, including HRV measures. The observations
were given weights of one for the first visit, the inverse of the
probability of returning for the second visit, and the product of the
inverse of the probability of returning for the second visit times the
inverse of the probability of returning for the third visit, and so on
for subsequent visits.

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

Page 4 of 10

Results Participants' characteristics at baseline visit are reported in
Table 1. Briefly, at this initial examination, participants evaluated
for the association between BC and HRV presented with a mean age of 73.6
years; most (71 %) were former or current smokers, 20 % were diabetic
and 25 % had a BMI > 30 kg/m2. Participants evaluated for the
association between PM2.5 and HRV Table 1 Characteristics at baseline of
study participants with information on BC (n = 540) and PM2.5 (n = 475)a
Study variable

Subjects with BCb

Subjects with PMb2.5

73.6 (7.0)

75.2 (6.4)

Body mass index (kg/m )

28.1 (4.0)

27.9 (4.1)

≥ 30 kg/m2 (n [%])

137 (25.4)

121 (25.5)

403 (74.6)

354 (74.5)

Age (years) 2

2

< 30 kg/m (n [%]) Fasting blood glucose (n [%]) < 110 mg/dL

371 (68.7)

332 (69.9)

≥ 110 or <126 mg/dL

96 (17.8)

91 (19.2)

≥ 126 mg/dL

73 (13.5)

52 (11.0)

Smoking

presented with a mean age of 75.2 years; most (70 %) were former or
current smokers, 21 % were diabetic and 26 % had a BMI > 30 kg/m2. We
also present participants' baseline HRV measures (HF, LF, SDNN, and the
LF:HF ratio) in Table 1. Pollutant concentrations across all study
visits and averaging periods are reported in Table 2. For example, for a
28 day moving average of BC exposure, we observed a mean exposure level
of 0.4 μg/m3 (SD: 0.2; 5th--95th percentiles: 0.2--0.8 μg/m3); for
PM2.5, the corresponding values were 9.5 μg/m3 (SD: 2.5; 5th--95th
percentiles: 5.8--14.2 μg/m3). For a 3 day moving average of BC
exposure, we observed a mean exposure level of 0.4 μg/m3, with a
standard deviation of 0.3. We report Spearman correlation coefficients
between selected exposure measure durations (3, 14, 28 and 84 days, as
well as 1 year) for both BC and PM2.5 in Additional file 1: Table S1.
For BC, correlations between exposure measurement periods were fairly
high, ranging from 0.65 to 0.97. For PM2.5, correlations were somewhat
weaker, ranging from 0.25 to 0.87. The correlation between 28 day BC
exposure and 1 year BC exposure was r = 0.76, and the corresponding
correlation for PM2.5 was r = 0.53. Associations between moving averages
of BC and PM2.5 exposures and HRV parameters are presented in Table 3.
We observed associations between increased sub-chronic BC exposure and
decreased HF, LF, and SDNN, as well as an increased LF:HF ratio, though
the confidence intervals were somewhat imprecise and in

Never smoker

156 (28.9)

143 (30.1)

Current smoker

22 (4.1)

14 (3.0)

Former smoker

362 (67.0)

318 (67.0)

Yes

325 (60.2)

311 (65.5)

No

215 (39.8)

164 (34.5)

Spring

135 (25.0)

112 (23.6)

Summer

109 (20.2)

120 (25.3)

Pollutants (moving averages)

Fall

166 (30.7)

144 (30.3)

BC (μg/m3)

Winter

130 (24.1)

99 (20.8)

Mean arterial pressure (mmHg)

92.6 (10.7)

87.9 (10.0)

Room temperature (°C)

24.1 (1.9)

23.3 (1.8)

Yes

107 (19.8)

99 (20.8)

No

433 (80.2)

376 (79.2)

Anti-hypertensive medicine use (n [%])

Season

Diabetes (n [%])

Oxidative stress gene score

Table 2 BC and PM2.5 exposure distributions for Normative Aging Study
participantsa N visits

Mean (SD)

5th--95th percentiles

IQR

3 days

1161

0.43 (0.29)

0.12--0.93

0.29

7 days

1161

0.44 (0.26)

0.14--0.85

0.28

14 days

1160

0.44 (0.25)

0.14--0.81

0.26

21 days

1153

0.44 (0.24)

0.14--0.81

0.26

28 days

1148

0.44 (0.24)

0.15--0.81

0.26

1 year

974

0.45 (0.17)

0.22--0.74

0.19

3 days

920

9.40 (4.48)

3.79--18.60

5.44

7 days

918

9.41 (3.32)

4.74--15.94

4.44

14 days

920

9.46 (2.91)

5.30--14.61

3.95

21 days

916

9.51 (2.67)

5.62--14.50

3.59

28 days

911

9.49 (2.53)

5.82--14.15

3.55

1 year

806

9.71 (1.36)

7.40--11.64

2.01

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

Low

184 (42.0)

146 (38.4)

High

254 (58.0)

234 (61.6)

Log10HF, msec2

1.9 (0.7)

2.0 (0.7)

Log10LF, msec2

2.0 (0.6)

1.9 (0.6)

Log10SDNN, msec

1.5 (0.3)

1.5 (0.3)

Log10LF:HF

0.04 (0.5)

−0.05 (0.5)

Heart rate variability

BC black carbon, PM2.5 particulate matter <2.5 μm in aerodynamic
diameter a Normative Aging Study (2000--2011) b Values are mean (SD) or
n (%)

BC black carbon, IQR interquartile range, PM2.5 particulate matter <2.5
μm in aerodynamic diameter, SD standard deviation a Study visits with
information on BC spanned 2000 and 2011. Study visits with information
on PM2.5 spanned 2003 and 2011

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

Page 5 of 10

Table 3 Mixed linear effects models estimating percent changes in HRV
measures according to one standard deviation increases in BC and PM2.5
levelsa,b Exposure duration 3 days

7 days

14 days

21 days

28 days

56 days

84 days

1 year

HRV parameter

BC

PM2.5

% change

95 % CI

% change

95 % CI

HF

−2.1

−4.8, 0.6

−35.5

−63.0, 12.5

LF

−1.0

−3.3, 1.4

−31.7

−57.5, 9.5

SDNN

−0.4

−1.5, 0.8

−11.5

−29.6, 11.4

Ratio (LF:HF)

1.1

−0.6, 2.9

6.5

−25.4, 52.0

HF

−1.9

−4.3, 0.6

4.3

−31.2, 58.2

LF

−0.7

−2.8, 1.5

9.4

−23.4, 56.1

SDNN

−0.4

−1.4, 0.6

3.1

−13.2, 22.4

Ratio (LF:HF)

1.1

−0.5, 2.7

4.4

20.1, 36.4

HF

−2.2

−4.5, 0.3

1.1

−30.5, 47.1

LF

−0.9

−2.9, 1.2

15.6

−16.2, 59.4

SDNN

−0.4

−1.4, 0.6

6.6

−8.7, 24.5

Ratio (LF:HF)

1.3

−0.3, 2.9

13.1

−10.8, 43.5

HF

−2.2

−4.4, 0.1

−6.8

−34.5, 32.6

LF

−1.2

−3.2, 0.9

15.0

−15.0, 55.6

SDNN

−0.6

−1.6, 0.4

6.8

−7.6, 23.5

Ratio (LF:HF)

1.1

−0.5, 2.7

21.6

−2.7, 51.9

HF

−2.3

−4.6, −0.02

−8.2

−34.8, 29.2

LF

−1.0

−3.0, 1.0

22.4

−8.6, 64.1

SDNN

−0.5

−1.5, 0.4

7.8

−6.3, 24.0

Ratio (LF:HF)

1.3

−0.2, 2.8

31.4

HF

−2.3

−4.6, −0.1

−13.1

−34.6, 15.4

LF

−1.0

−3.0, 1.0

11.2

−13.0, 42.0

SDNN

−0.7

−1.6, 0.3

2.5

−8.9, 15.4

5.9, 63.0

Ratio (LF:HF)

1.3

−0.2, 2.8

25.0

4.5, 49.6

HF

−2.0

−4.2, 0.2

−2.6

−24.3, 25.4

LF

−0.9

−2.8, 1.1

16.1

−6.6, 44.1

SDNN

−0.7

−1.6, 0.3

6.0

−4.5, 17.7

Ratio (LF:HF)

1.2

−0.3, 2.6

16.2

−1.0, 36.5

HF

−0.3

−2.1, 1.6

1.7

−14.6, 21.2

LF

−0.2

−1.7, 1.4

23.6

6.0, 44.1

SDNN

−0.1

−0.9, 0.7

7.0

−0.5, 15.1

Ratio (LF:HF)

0.04

−1.1, 1.2

21.0

8.6, 34.8

BC black carbon, HF high frequency, LF low frequency, PM2.5 particulate
matter <2.5 μm in diameter, SD standard deviation, SDNN standard
deviation of normal-to-normal intervals a Specifically, we evaluated
associations between percent change in HRV and 1 SD increases in BC
(1161 visits) and PM2.5 (992 visits) b Study visits with information on
BC spanned 2000 and 2011. Study visits with information on PM2.5 spanned
2003 and 2011

most cases spanned the null. This association was slightly stronger when
evaluating 28-day and 56-day moving averages of exposure relative to
other exposure durations, and was strongest for HF in comparison to
other measures of HRV. For example, a 1 SD increase in BC measured
during the preceding 28 days was associated with a 2.3 % decrease in HF
(95 % CI: −4.6, −0.02), a 1 SD increase in 21 day BC exposure was
associated

with a 2.2 % decrease in HF (95 % CI: −4.4, 0.1), and a 1 SD increase in
7 day BC exposure was associated with a 1.9 % decrease in HF (95 % CI:
−4.3, 0.6). A 1 SD increase in 28 day BC exposure was also associated
with a 1.0 % decrease in LF (95 % CI: −3.0, 1.0), a 0.5 % decrease in
SDNN (95 % CI: −1.5, 0.4), and a 1.3 % increase in the LF:HF ratio (95 %
CI: −0.2, 2.8). When evaluating long-term BC exposures of 1 year prior
to

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

study visit, results showed a similar pattern but were attenuated
greatly (Table 3). Moreover, when we included 28 day and 1 year BC
exposure in the same model for HF, the magnitude of the association with
28 day BC increased, while the association with 1 year BC changed
direction (data not shown). Similarly, effect estimates for 28 day BC
were strengthened when adjusting for BC exposure 1 day before the visit
(data not shown), indicating that short-term exposures are not
dominating the observed association with sub-chronic BC. We found some
evidence of associations between increased short-term PM2.5 exposure
estimates and decreases in HF, LF, and SDNN, as well as increased LF:HF
ratio (our results for a 3 day moving average are reported in Table 3;
data for 1 and 2 day averages are not shown), though the associated
confidence intervals were very wide and many of the effect estimates
were not statistically significant. In addition, the patterns of
association we observed for shorterterm exposures were inconsistent when
evaluating associations between modeled PM2.5 exposures reflecting 7 day
to 1 year moving averages and HF and SDNN (Table 3). Associations
between sub-chronic and long-term PM2.5 and both LF and the LF:HF ratio
were consistently elevated and tended to be strongest for longer-term
exposures. For example, the percent increase in the LF:HF ratio in
relation to a 1 SD increase in PM2.5 was 13.1 % (95 % CI: −10.8, 43.5)
for a 14 day moving average, 31.4 % (95 % CI: 5.9, 63.0) for a 28 day
moving average, and 21.0 % (95 % CI: 8.6, 34.8) for a 1 year average.
The corresponding increases for LF were 15.6 % (95 % CI: −16.2, 59.4),
22.4 % (95 % CI: −8.6, 64.1), and 23.6 % (95 % CI: 6.0, 44.1,
respectively (Table 3). Finally, associations between 28 day BC exposure
estimates and HF stratified by obesity, hypertension, diabetes, and
oxidative stress genetic score are reported in Table 4. We also examined
interactions between 28 day BC and the aforementioned characteristics
with respect to other HRV measures (data not shown). No multiplicative
interaction terms rose to the level of statistical significance and
confidence intervals were wide. Consistent with previous findings,
however, the decrease in HRV in relation to BC exposure was greater
among those with obesity or diabetes. For example, a 1 SD increase in BC
exposure was associated with a 1.7 % decrease in HF (95 % CI: −4.5, 1.2)
among men with BMI <30, and a 3.5 % decrease in HF among men with a BMI
of 30 or greater (95 % CI: −7.4, 0.5) (Table 4). BC exposure was also
associated with a greater increase in HF among those with a lower
oxidative stress genetic score. We observed no consistent patterns for
hypertension.

Page 6 of 10

Table 4 Modification of the association between a one standard deviation
increase in 28-day BC and percent change in HFa Characteristics

% change

95 % CI

Oxidative stress genetic score < median

−3.3

−7.4, 1.0

Oxidative stress genetic score > median

−1.8

−4.9, 1.5

P for interaction

0.55

Not obese

−1.7

−4.5, 1.2

Obese

−3.5

−7.4, 0.5

P for interaction

0.64

No diabetes

−2.1

−4.6, 0.4

Diabetes

−4.6

−10.6, 1.8

P for interaction

0.51

No hypertension

−2.2

−5.8, 1.5

Hypertension

−2.2

−5.0, 0.8

P for interaction

0.60

BC black carbon, HF high frequency power, SD standard deviation a We
evaluated effect modification of the association between a 1 SD increase
in the 28 day moving average of BC exposure and percent change in HF;
Normative Aging Study, 2000--2011

Discussion We report positive associations between several measures of
sub-chronic BC exposure, a marker of traffic pollution, and decreased
HRV in a cohort of elderly men, although confidence intervals were wide
and mostly spanned the null. These findings are consistent with many
previous studies reporting associations between short-term particulate
pollution exposure and decreased HRV [10, 14], which is predictive of
increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [12, 13], but extend
the literature to longer exposure measurement periods, and demonstrate
somewhat larger effect sizes for those longer exposures. Longer-term
exposures may be of most interest when assessing risk for adverse
cardiovascular outcomes [19]. It is also notable that the observed
associations reflect not only short-term spikes in particulate levels,
but rather occur at particulate pollutant levels that are consistently
at or below EPA standards. Our also extends the literature by using a
sophisticated modeling approach, rather than fixed monitoring data, to
predict individualized residential pollutant exposures during 3, 7, 14,
21, 28, 56 and 84 days and well as 1 year prior to each study visit [23,
25]. When evaluating BC exposures, we consistently found a larger effect
size for HF, a marker of parasympathetic drive, than for LF. We also
found some evidence of an increased LF:HF ratio. Recent research
suggests the LF:HF ratio may be influenced primarily by parasympathetic
output and baroreflex function [29, 30]. We observed attenuated
associations between HF and 1-year BC exposure, which changed direction
upon adjustment for 28-day BC exposure, suggesting the weak

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

association observed between 1 year BC and HRV was explained by
correlations with the shorter-term, subchronic exposures rather than by
the long-term exposure. We did not observe a consistent pattern of
associations between sub-chronic or long-term PM2.5 exposure and HF.
While studies consistently report associations between short-term
particulate pollution exposure and reduced HF, especially among the
elderly or those with preexisting conditions [14, 16], very few have
examined exposure periods of greater than a few days [31, 32]. Hence,
although long-term PM exposure is known to have a stronger effect on
cardiovascular mortality than acute exposure [19], the effects of
long-term or subchronic particulate exposure on HF are unclear.
Specifically, to our knowledge, only two studies have examined the
association between long-term PM exposure (specifically, PM <10 μm in
aerodynamic diameter [PM10] levels averaged over a 10 year period, among
participants aged 50 and over) and HRV; they reported a null overall
association between long-term PM10 and HRV, with reduced HRV observed
among participants taking ACE inhibitors or with a particular
pro-inflammatory polymorphism [31, 32]. Ours is also the first study to
evaluate sub-chronic PM2.5 or BC exposure in relation to HRV. Further
studies are necessary to clarify the effect of longer-term pollutant
exposure on cardiac autonomic control. We report discrepant findings for
BC and PM2.5. The direction of results for modeled PM2.5 exposure 1, 2,
or 3 days prior to the study visit are consistent with previous fixed
monitoring studies from the NAS [10, 15] as well as with our findings
for sub-chronic BC exposure. Air pollution was associated with decreased
HF, LF, and SDNN as well as an increased LF:HF ratio in these studies.
In our study, associations between longer-term PM2.5 levels and HF
measures were inconsistent, and PM2.5 was related to an increase in LF,
which is inconsistent with previous studies among elderly people, but is
sometimes seen among younger subjects [33, 34]. We also observed a
consistent, though imprecise, positive association between PM2.5
exposure and an increased LF:HF ratio, which was similar to our results
for BC and was in general strongest for exposures measured over longer
time periods. Although BC is a component of PM, the source profiles of
BC and PM2.5 differ. BC is a marker of traffic pollution, especially
diesel exhaust and, in Boston, home heating oil [35], whereas these
sources contribute to a minority of PM2.5 levels [36, 37]. The effects
of different particle components or sources on health outcomes may vary,
and emerging evidence suggests that traffic pollution may be especially
important with regard to cardiovascular disease [38]. It should be noted
that BC and PM2.5 estimates were derived from different exposure models;
the differences in

Page 7 of 10

results for BC and PM2.5 and for shorter and longer-term PM2.5 do not
have a clear biological basis and could also be due to a difference in
modeling approach. We also note that that confidence intervals for the
PM2.5 estimates were very wide, which increases the likelihood some of
our results may be due to chance. While we cannot be sure of an
underlying mechanism, one possible reason that we observed stronger
associations for sub-chronic rather than long-term BC could be that HRV
fluctuates based on a variety of short-term stimuli and this might
overpower the effect of air pollution exposure over the course of a
year, but not a shorter period of 1--2 months. Potential mechanisms
underlying possible associations between BC or PM2.5 and HRV include a
particulateinduced increase in pulmonary oxidative stress, which can in
turn induce proinflammatory cytokines [39], increase extracellular
calcium influx [40], inactivate nitric oxide [41], and lead to greater
parasympathetic than sympathetic nervous system withdrawal [19]. The
result of these changes is an increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity
and mortality, including ventricular arrhythmias and myocardial
infarction [19]. We did not observe strong evidence of effect
modification by obesity, hypertension, diabetes, or oxidative stress
allelic profile, which may have been due to the low precision of
stratified effect estimates. While not rising to the level of
statistical significance, associations between BC exposure and HRV were
somewhat stronger among men with obesity and diabetes, which is notable
mainly because of similarity to previous findings [10, 15]. One
explanation for these findings is that diabetes and obesity are
themselves associated with reduced autonomic function [42--44], possibly
rendering diabetics and those with a BMI over 30 kg/m2 more susceptible
to the effects of particles on this same endpoint. We observed a
stronger reduction in HF relative to BC exposure among men with lower
oxidative stress genetic scores, which was unexpected. It should be
noted that we did not have sufficient power to examine effect
modification in an optimal way, and larger studies will be needed in the
future in order to examine the possibility of susceptible subgroups more
thoroughly, and to obtain more precise and stable effect estimates than
we were able to calculate. We acknowledge several limitations of our
study. These include potential exposure misclassification of pollutant
estimates, which could affect precision and potential bias effect size
[45]. This possibility is standard to environmental epidemiology
studies, and our use of sophisticated, spatially and temporally resolved
models to estimate individualized residential pollutant exposures has
likely reduced misclassification relative to fixed monitoring studies.
The exposure model also did not account for indoor pollutant levels or
residential indoor

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

temperatures, and did not estimate the rate at which outdoor pollutants
may penetrate indoors, though studies have shown that the contribution
of outdoor air pollution to indoor pollutant levels [46, 47] and to
monitored personal exposures, including in the Boston area [48], is
fairly high. Our study did not adjust for multiple comparisons. We chose
to qualitatively examine the pattern of results instead. As we noted
earlier, the confidence intervals associated with most of the observed
effect estimates were wide, especially when evaluating PM2.5, and only a
handful of effect estimates were statistically significant. Our findings
are consistent with the greater literature on this subject, which adds
plausibility to the pattern of associations we observed. Larger studies
with greater statistical power will be needed to confirm and expand on
our initial findings. Ideally, we would have compared results for PM2.5
and BC estimated from the same exposure models. However, this was not
possible in our study because PM2.5 levels were derived from AOD
measurements, which do not capture the BC component of PM, and many of
the BC measurements were obtained from ethylometers, which measured BC
but not overall PM. Thus, we cannot rule out that differences in our
findings for BC and fine PM could be due to differing modeling
approaches. The changes in HRV that we observed in this study do not
rise to a level of clinical concern, but shifting the distribution of
HRV measures may be of public health concern because of changes among
‘borderline' individuals. Furthermore, PM2.5 levels in the Boston area
are generally below EPA air quality standards, whereas other areas may
have consistently higher pollutant levels which could affect HRV to a
greater extent. Finally, part of our goal was to identify mechanisms
mediating the association between particulate pollutant exposure and
adverse cardiovascular outcomes, and these results, if confirmed,
suggest that effects on HRV may be part of that pathway. Our study
population is comprised of elderly men, the vast majority of whom are
retired, which is both a limitation and strength. Participants'
estimated residential exposures are likely to reflect the great majority
of their total exposure burden, which is a strength in terms of exposure
assessment, but results may not be generalizable to other (non-elderly,
non-White, female) segments of the population. We examined this
association within an elderly cohort because the elderly comprise a
large, susceptible subpopulation with respect to cardiovascular ailments
and health effects of particle exposure. Finally, the sampling rate we
used when measuring HRV is still clinically appropriate, but is lower
that what is currently preferred for research purposes. This could lead
to some non-differential measurement error and a consequent reduction in
statistical power and bias towards the null.

Page 8 of 10

Strengths of our study include access to a large, general population
cohort with extensive and repeated information regarding pollutant
exposures, potential confounders and effect modifiers, and HRV data from
multiple study visits. While most air pollution studies examine
short-term exposures, longer-term exposures may be of most interest when
assessing risk for chronic disease and dysfunction. Hence, an additional
strength of our study was the reconstruction of participants' subchronic
and long-term BC and PM2.5 exposures using comprehensive models. Our use
of spatially resolved residential exposure measurements is another
important strength, especially for BC, since traffic exposures can vary
significantly within a small geographic distance [25].

Conclusions In our study of particulate air pollution exposure and HRV,
we report a pattern of associations between subchronic BC exposure
estimates and decreased HF, LF, and SDNN, as well as increased LF:HF
ratio. Although our limited statistical power led to wide confidence
intervals that often spanned the null, our findings were similar to
previous studies of short-term exposure in the NAS [10] and other study
populations [14]. Long-term BC exposure was not linked to HRV after
adjustment for sub-chronic exposure levels. We report discrepant
findings for BC and PM2.5, as sub-chronic and long-term PM2.5 exposure
estimates were associated with an increased LF and LF:HF ratio, but not
other changes in HRV (HF or SDNN). HRV may mediate associations between
particulate exposures and adverse cardiovascular outcomes, and assessing
longer-term exposures is important to understanding effects of air
pollution on chronic disease and dysfunction. Future high-powered
studies should therefore further evaluate associations between
sub-chronic or long-term pollutant exposures and HRV, including with
respect to identifying potentially susceptible subpopulations.
Additional file Additional file 1: Table S1. Spearman correlation
coefficients between selected exposure measurement intervals for BC and
PMa2.5. BC: black carbon; PM2.5: particulate matter <2.5 μm in
aerodynamic diameter a. Normative Aging Study (2000--2011). (DOC 39 kb)

Abbreviations 8-OhdG: 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine; AOD: aerosol optical
depth; BC: black carbon; BMI: body mass index; CAT: catalase; DBP:
diastolic blood pressure; ECG: electrocardiogram; FBG: fasting blood
glucose; GC: group-specific component; GCLM: glutamate-cysteine ligase,
modifier subunit; HF: high frequency power; HMOX1: heme oxygenase 1;
HRV: heart rate variability; LF: low frequency power; MAP: mean arterial
blood pressure; NAS: Normative Aging Study; NQO1: NAD(P)H dehydrogenase,
quinone 1; PM10: particulate matter <10 μm in aerodynamic diameter;
PM2.5: particulate matter <2.5 μm in aerodynamic diameter; SBP: systolic
blood pressure; SD: standard deviation; SDNN: standard deviation of
normal-to-normal intervals; SE: standard error.

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
financial or non-financial interests. Authors' contributions IM was
involved in designing and conducting statistical analyses,
interpretation of results, drafting the manuscript, and review and
approval of the manuscript. BC and IK were both involved in creating the
study's environmental exposure model and in the review and approval of
the manuscript. PK was also involved in the creation of the study's
environmental exposure model and was involved in other aspects of data
acquisition as well as review and approval of the manuscript. PV was
involved in data acquisition and review and approval of the manuscript.
JS was involved in the study conception, data acquisition, analysis, and
interpretation, drafting of the manuscript, and review and approval of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the US Environmental
Protection Agency grants R832416 and RD 83479801 and by the National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences grants ES015172-01 and
ES000002. The VA Normative Aging Study is supported by the Cooperative
Studies Program/Epidemiology Research and Information Center of the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs and is a component of the Massachusetts
Veterans Epidemiology Research and Information Center, Boston,
Massachusetts. Author details 1 Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk Program,
Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health,
Landmark Center, 401 Park Dr, Boston, MA 02215, USA. 2Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
3Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. 4VA Normative Aging Study,
Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System and the Department of Medicine
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. 5Exposure,
Epidemiology and Risk Program, Department of Environmental Health,
Harvard School of Public Health, and Channing Laboratory, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Received: 17
March 2015 Accepted: 29 October 2015

References 1. Brook RD. Cardiovascular effects of air pollution. Clin
Sci. 2008;115(6):175--87. 2. Miller KA, Siscovick DS, Sheppard L,
Shepherd K, Sullivan JH, Anderson GL, et al. Long-term exposure to air
pollution and incidence of cardiovascular events in women. N Engl J Med.
2007;356(5):457--8. 3. Dubowsky SD, Suh H, Schwartz J, Coull BA, Gold
DR. Diabetes, obesity, and hypertension may enhance associations between
air pollution and markers of systemic inflammation. Environ Health
Perspect. 2006;114:992--8. 4. O'Neill MS, Veves A, Sarnat JA, Zanobetti
A, Gold DR, Economides PA, et al. Air pollution and inflammation in type
2 diabetes: a mechanism of susceptibility. Occup Environ Med.
2007;64(6):373--9. 5. Kim JY, Mukherjee S, Ngo LC, Christiani DC.
Urinary 8-hydroxy-2′deoxyguanosine as a biomarker of oxidative DNA
damage in workers exposed to fine particulates. Environ Health Perspect.
2004;112:666--71. 6. Nel A. Air pollution-related illness: effects of
particles. Science. 2005;308(5723):804--6. 7. Utell MJ, Frampton MW,
Zareba W, Devlin RB, Cascio WE. Cardiovascular effects associated with
air pollution: potential mechanisms and methods of testing. Inhal
Toxicol. 2002;14:1231--47. 8. Devlin RB, Ghio AJ, Kehrl H, Sanders G,
Cascio W. Elderly humans exposed to concentrated air pollution particles
have decreased heart rate variability. Eur Respir J Suppl.
2003;40:76s--80. 9. Gold DR, Litonjua A, Schwartz J, Lovett E, Larson A,
Nearing B, et al. Ambient pollution and heart rate variability.
Circulation. 2000;101:1267--73. 10. Park SK, O'Neill MS, Vokonas PS,
Sparrow D, Schwartz J. Effects of air pollution on heart rate
variability: the VA Normative Aging Study. Environ Health Perspect.
2005;113(3):304--9. 11. Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology
and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. Heart
rate variability: standards of

Page 9 of 10

12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 

measurement, physiological interpretation and clinical use. Circulation.
1996;93:1043--65. Tsuji H, Larson MG, Venditti Jr FJ, Manders ES, Evans
JC, Feldman CL, et al. Impact of reduced heart rate variability on risk
for cardiac events. The Framingham Heart Study. Circulation.
1996;94(11):2850--5. Nolan J, Batin PD, Andrews R, Lindsay SJ, Brooksby
P, Mullen M, et al. Prospective study of heart rate variability and
mortality in chronic heart failure: results of the United Kingdom heart
failure evaluation and assessment of risk trial (UK-heart). Circulation.
1998;98(15):1510--6. Pieters N, Plusquin M, Cox B, Kicinski M,
Vangronsveld J, Nawrot TS. An epidemiological appraisal of the
association between heart rate variability and particulate air
pollution: a meta-analysis. Heart. 2012;98:1127--35. Baja ES, Schwartz
JD, Coull BA, Wellenius GA, Vokonas PS, Suh HH. Structural equation
modeling of parasympathetic and sympathetic response to traffic air
pollution in a repeated measures study. Environ Health. 2013;12(1):81.
Creason J, Neas L, Walsh D, Williams R, Sheldon L, Liao D, et al.
Particulate matter and heart rate variability among elderly retirees:
the Baltimore 1998 PM study. J Expo Anal Environ Epidemiol.
2001;11(2):116--22. Schwartz J, Litonjua A, Suh H, Verrier M, Zanobetti
A, Syring M, et al. Traffic-related pollution and heart rate variability
in a panel of elderly subjects. Thorax. 2005;60(6):455--61. Chahine T,
Baccarelli A, Litonjua A, Wright RO, Suh H, Gold DR, et al. Particulate
air pollution, oxidative stress genes, and heart rate variability in an
elderly cohort. Environ Health Perspect. 2007;12:1617--22. Brook RD,
Rajagopalan S, Pope 3rd CA, Brook JR, Bhatnagar A, Diez-Roux AV, et al.
Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease: an update
to the scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2010;12:2331--78. Laden F, Neas LM, Dockery DW, Schwartz J.
Association of fine particulate matter from different sources with daily
mortality in six U.S. cities. Environ Health Perspect. 2000;108:941--7.
Bell B, Rose C, Damon A. The Normative Aging Study: an interdisciplinary
and longitudinal study of health and aging. Aging Hum Dev. 1972;3:4--17.
Pope III CA, Eatough DJ, Gold DR, Pang Y, Nielsen KR, Nath P, et al.
Acute exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and heart rate
variability. Environ Health Perspect. 2001;109:711--6. Suglia SF,
Gryparis A, Wright RO, Schwartz J, Wright RJ. Association of black
carbon with cognition among children in a prospective birth cohort
study. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;167:280--6. Fang SC, Mehta AJ, Alexeeff SE,
Gryparis A, Coull B, Vokonas P, et al. Residential black carbon exposure
and circulating markers of systemic inflammation in elderly males: the
Normative Aging Study. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120(5):674--80.
Kloog I, Chudnovsky A, Just A, Nordio F, Koutrakis P, Coull B, et al. A
new hybrid spatio temporal model for estimating daily multi-year PM2.5
concentrations across northeastern USA using high resolution aerosol
optical depth data. Atmos Environ. 2014;95:581--90. Kalkstein LS,
Valimont KM. An evaluation of summer discomfort in the United States
using a relative climatological index. Bull Am Meteorol Soc.
1986;7:842--8. O'Neill MS, Zanobetti A, Schwartz J. Modifiers of the
temperature and mortality association in seven US cities. Am J
Epidemiol. 2003;157:1074--82. Bind MA, Coull B, Suh H, Wright RO,
Baccarelli A, Vokonas P, et al. A novel genetic score approach using
instruments to investigate interactions between pathways and
environment: application to air pollution. PLoS One. 2014;9(4), e96000.
Goldstein DS, Bentho O, Park MY, Sharabi Y. Low-frequency power of heart
rate variability is not a measure of cardiac sympathetic tone but may be
a measure of modulation of cardiac autonomic outflows by baroreflexes.
Exp Physiol. 2011;96(12):1255--61. Reyes del Paso GA, Langewitz W,
Mulder LJ, van Roon A, Duschek S. The utility of low frequency heart
rate variability as an index of sympathetic cardiac tone: a review with
emphasis on a reanalysis of previous studies. Psychophysiology.
2013;50(5):477--87. Adam M, Felber-Dietrich D, Schaffner E, Carballo D,
Barthelemy JC, Gaspoz JM, et al. Long-term exposure to traffic-related
PM(10) and decreased heart rate variability: is the association
restricted to subjects taking ACE inhibitors? Environ Int.
2012;48:9--16. Adam M, Imboden M, Boes E, Schaffner E, Kunzli N,
Phuleria HC, et al. Modifying effect of a common polymorphism in the
interleukin-6 promoter on the relationship between long-term exposure to

Mordukhovich et al. Environmental Health (2015) 14:87

33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 

Page 10 of 10

traffic-related particulate matter and heart rate variability. PLoS One.
2014;9(8), e104978. Link MS, Dockery DW. Air pollution and the
triggering of cardiac arrhythmias. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2010;25(1):16--22.
Shields KN, Cavallari JM, Hunt MJ, Lazo M, Molina M, Molina L, et al.
Traffic-related air pollution exposures and changes in heart rate
variability in Mexico City: a panel study. Environ Health. 2013;12:7.
Grahame TJ, Klemm R, Schlesinger RB. Public health and components of
particulate matter: the changing assessment of black carbon. J Air Waste
Manag Assoc. 2014;64(6):620--60. Keuken MP, Moerman M, Voogt M, Blom M,
Weijers EP, Röckmann T, et al. Source contributions to PM2.5 and PM10 at
an urban background and street location. Atmos Environ. 2013;71:26--35.
Thurston GD, Ito K, Lall R. A source apportionment of U.S. fine
particulate matter air pollution. Atmos Environ. 2011;45(24):3924--36.
Adar SD, Kaufman JD. Cardiovascular disease and air pollutants:
evaluating and improving epidemiological data implicating traffic
exposure. Inhal Toxicol. 2007;19 Suppl 1:135--49. Donaldson K, Stone V,
Seaton A, MacNee W. Ambient particle inhalation and the cardiovascular
system: potential mechanisms. Environ Health Perspect. 2001;109 Suppl
4:523--7. Stone V, Tuinman M, Vamvakopoulos JE, Shaw J, Brown D,
Petterson S, et al. Increased calcium influx in a monocytic cell line on
exposure to ultrafine carbon black. Eur Respir J. 2000;15:297--303.
Thomas GD, Zhang W, Victor RG. Impaired modulation of sympathetic
vasoconstriction in contracting skeletal muscle of rats with chronic
myocardial infarctions: role of oxidative stress. Circ Res.
2001;88:816--23. Burger AJ, Aronson D. Effect of diabetes mellitus on
heart rate variability in patients with congestive heart failure. Pacing
Clin Electrophysiol. 2001;24:53--9. Poirier P, Giles TD, Bray GA, Hong
Y, Stern JS, Pi-Sunyer FX, et al. Obesity and cardiovascular disease:
pathophysiology, evaluation, and effect of weight loss: an update of the
1997 American Heart Association Scientific Statement on Obesity and
Heart Disease from the Obesity Committee of the Council on Nutrition,
Physical Activity, and Metabolism. Circulation. 2006;113(6):898--918.
Singh JP, Larson MG, O'Donnell CJ, Wilson PF, Tsuji H, Lloyd-Jones DM,
et al. Association of hyperglycemia with reduced heart rate variability
(the Framingham Heart Study). Am J Cardiol. 2000;86:309--12. Bergen S,
Sheppard L, Sampson PD, Kim SY, Richards M, Vedal S, et al. A national
prediction model for PM2.5 component exposures and measurement
error-corrected health effect inference. Environ Health Perspect.
2013;121(9):1017--25. Partti-Pellinen K, Marttila O, Ahonen A, Suominen
O, Haahtela T. Penetration of nitrogen oxides and particles from outdoor
into indoor air and removal of the pollutants through filtration of
incoming air. Indoor Air. 2000;10(2):126--32. Meng QY, Spector D, Colome
S, Turpin B. Determinants of indoor and personal exposure to PM2.5 of
indoor and outdoor origin during the RIOPA study. Atmost Environ.
2009;43(36):5750--8. Sarnat JA, Brown KW, Schwartz J, Coull BA,
Koutrakis P. Ambient gas concentrations and personal particulate matter
exposures: implications for studying the health effects of particles.
Epidemiology. 2005;16(3):385--95.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central and take full advantage
of: • Convenient online submission • Thorough peer review • No space
constraints or color ﬁgure charges • Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar • Research which
is freely available for redistribution Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit


