Articles

Eﬀect of increased concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide on the
global threat of zinc deﬁciency: a modelling study Samuel S Myers, K
Ryan Wessells, Itai Kloog, Antonella Zanobetti, Joel Schwartz

Summary Background Increasing concentrations of atmospheric carbon
dioxide (CO2) lower the content of zinc and other nutrients in important
food crops. Zinc deﬁciency is currently responsible for large burdens of
disease globally, and the populations who are at highest risk of zinc
deﬁciency also receive most of their dietary zinc from crops. By
modelling dietary intake of bioavailable zinc for the populations of 188
countries under both an ambient CO2 and elevated CO2 scenario, we sought
to estimate the eﬀect of anthropogenic CO2 emissions on the global risk
of zinc deﬁciency. Methods We estimated per capita per day bioavailable
intake of zinc for the populations of 188 countries at ambient CO2
concentrations (375--384 ppm) using food balance sheet data for 2003--07
from the Food and Agriculture Organization. We then used previously
published data from free air CO2 enrichment and open-top chamber
experiments to model zinc intake at elevated CO2 concentrations (550
ppm, which is the concentration expected by 2050). Estimates developed
by the International Zinc Nutrition Consultative Group were used for
country-speciﬁc theoretical mean daily per-capita physiological
requirements for zinc. Finally, we used these data on zinc
bioavailability and population-weighted estimated average zinc
requirements to estimate the risk of inadequate zinc intake among the
populations of the diﬀerent nations under the two scenarios (ambient and
elevated CO2). The diﬀerence between the population at risk at elevated
and ambient CO2 concentrations (ie, population at new risk of zinc
deﬁciency) was our measure of impact. Findings The total number of
people estimated to be placed at new risk of zinc deﬁciency by 2050 was
138 million (95% CI 120--156). The people likely to be most aﬀected live
in Africa and South Asia, with nearly 48 million (32--63) residing in
India alone. Global maps of increased risk show signiﬁcant
heterogeneity. Interpretation Our results indicate that one heretofore
unquantiﬁed human health eﬀect associated with anthropogenic CO2
emissions will be a signiﬁcant increase in the human population at risk
of zinc deﬁciency. Our country-speciﬁc ﬁndings can be used to help guide
interventions aimed at reducing this vulnerability.

Lancet Glob Health 2015; 3: e639--45 Published Online July 16, 2015
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ S2214-109X(15)00093-5 See Comment page e585
Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T H Chan School of Public
Health, Cambridge, MA, USA (S S Myers MD, A Zanobetti PhD, Prof J
Schwartz PhD); Harvard University Center for the Environment, Cambridge,
MA, USA (S S Myers); Department of Nutrition, University of
California---Davis, Davis, CA, USA (K R Wessells PhD); Department of
Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel (I Kloog PhD) Correspondence to: Dr Samuel S
Myers, Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T H Chan School of
Public Health, Cambridge, MA 02115, USA Sam\_Myers@hms.harvard.edu

Funding Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Winslow Foundation. Copyright ©
Myers et al. Open Access article published under the terms of CC
BY-NC-ND.

Introduction Adequate zinc intake is a cornerstone of global maternal
and child health, and roughly 17% of the global population was estimated
to be at risk of zinc deﬁciency in 2011.1,2 Zinc deﬁciency increases the
risk of premature delivery and reduces growth and weight gain in infants
and young children.3 Adequate zinc intake is also important in proper
immune function.4 Preventive zinc supplementation in zinc-deﬁcient
populations decreases morbidity from childhood diarrhoea, acute lower
respiratory infections, and all-cause mortality.5--8 The global burden
of disease attributed to zinc deﬁciency is high, with greater than 100
000 deaths per year from diarrhoea and pneumonia in children younger
than 5 years attributable to zinc deﬁciency.9 Food crops such as wheat,
rice, barley, soya, and ﬁeld peas, which serve as an important source of
dietary zinc for billions of people around the world, have recently
www.lancet.com/lancetgh Vol 3 October 2015

been shown to contain lower concentrations of zinc and other nutrients
when grown under open ﬁeld conditions at a concentration of carbon
dioxide (hereafter referred to as [CO2]) the world is expected to
experience by 2050 (roughly 550 ppm).10,11 To understand the global
health implications of these changes, we aimed to model the per-capita
availability of dietary zinc and phytate (a phosphate storage molecule
that inhibits absorption of zinc in the diet) worldwide under both
ambient and elevated [CO2] scenarios. For each country, under each
scenario, we aimed to calculate the proportion of the population at risk
of inadequate zinc intake. By comparing the results for each scenario,
we aimed to estimate the proportion of each national population that
would be placed at new risk of inadequate zinc intake as a result of
rising [CO2] in the atmosphere, and to identify geographical regions
where populations are particularly vulnerable to the nutritional impacts
of e639

Articles

Research in context Evidence before this study Before this study, there
was strong evidence that zinc deﬁciency was a signiﬁcant global health
problem aﬀecting at least 17% of the global population and responsible
for large burdens of disease around the world. More recently, strong
evidence has emerged from free air carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE)
experiments that the edible portions of food crops grown at elevated
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations [CO2] have lower zinc, iron,
and protein contents than identical cultivars of the same crops grown
under identical growing conditions at ambient [CO2]. These same
experiments showed that phytate concentrations were lower in wheat
cultivars grown at elevated [CO2] but phytate content in other food
crops was unaﬀected. Added value of this study This is the ﬁrst study to
combine data on nutrient changes in food crops expected at higher levels
of atmospheric CO2 with

increasing [CO2] as a result of their diets and their overall zinc and
phytate intake.

Methods Eﬀect of elevated [CO2] on zinc and phytate concentrations To
estimate the size of the eﬀect of elevated [CO2] on zinc and phytate
concentrations, we used a previously published meta-analysis of data
pooled by crop, from free air carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE) and
open-top chamber experiments in which crops were grown at ambient and
elevated [CO2] and the edible portion of the food crop was tested for
zinc, phytate, or both.10 Phytate concentrations were only found to
change signiﬁcantly in wheat (p<0·05) in response to elevated [CO2] so
only wheat phytate concentrations were adjusted in our scenarios.
Estimates of the eﬀect of elevated [CO2] on nutrient content were used
to adjust per-capita nutrient intake from each food commodity as
described below.

Country-speciﬁc, per-capita zinc and phytate intake

See Online for appendix

e640

We analysed national food balance sheet data from 2003--07, which are
available from the Food and Agriculture Organization,12 to estimate
country-speciﬁc, per-capita zinc and phytate intake under both ambient
(375--384 ppm during this time period)13 and elevated (roughly 550 ppm)
[CO2] scenarios. The food balance sheets provide estimated
country-speciﬁc data for 210 countries or areas on the average daily
per-capita consumption of 95 “standardised” food commodities (kcal per
capita per day). Of these 210 countries or areas, we could obtain
demographic data for 188 countries, which became the subjects of our
analysis. The remaining 22 territories and states, mostly small island
entities, were excluded from further analyses because we restricted the
analyses to national populations. Plantsource food commodities reported
in the food balance

estimates of dietary intake of most of the world's population in order
to model the eﬀect of rising [CO2] on the global risk of zinc deﬁciency.
The study indicates that, in addition to disrupting the global climate
system, anthropogenic CO2 emissions are also threatening millions of
people with increased risk of zinc deﬁciency. The study also indicates
that the distribution of the populations at risk of increased zinc
deﬁciency is heterogeneous and concentrated in Africa and South Asia.
Implications of all the available evidence From a policy perspective,
these ﬁndings suggest that interventions including biofortiﬁcation of
staple food crops, supplementation, and fortiﬁcation should be targeted
at those populations identiﬁed as most vulnerable. In addition, these
ﬁndings provide additional support for the urgent need to mitigate
global CO2 emissions.

sheets were initially categorised as C3 legumes, C3 tubers, C3 other
plants, or C4 grasses. If crop-speciﬁc data on the eﬀects of elevated
[CO2] on changes in the zinc and phytate contents were available from
FACE or open-top chamber experiments, commodities were subsequently
assigned to these “primary” groups: maize, peas, rice, sorghum, soya,
wheat, barley, and potatoes. When cropspeciﬁc data were not available,
commodities were assigned to one of three “composite” groups, which were
composed of the weighted means of crop-speciﬁc data from the FACE or
open-top chamber experiments (C3 plants: wheat and barley, with and
without rice; C3 legumes: soya and peas; C4 grasses: corn and sorghum).
Tubers other than potatoes were assumed to be closest to potatoes and
the values for potatoes were used for those crops. Because rice is grown
under very diﬀerent (immersion) conditions than other C3 plants, it was
not clear whether it should be included in our composite estimates of
the mean eﬀect of elevated [CO2] on C3 plants. To address this
uncertainty, we generated two diﬀerent models for adjusting zinc and
phytate contents of the food balance sheet food commodities--- one which
included rice in the C3 plant composite estimates and one which did not.
The assignment of each food commodity is listed in the appendix (p 1).
The food balance sheet country-speciﬁc data on food availability (kcal
per capita per day) were used to calculate the per-capita zinc and
phytate contents of the daily food supply (mg per capita per day), prior
to accounting for the eﬀects of elevated [CO2]. The estimated zinc and
phytate content (mg/100 kcal) for each food commodity at ambient [CO2]
was obtained from a composite nutrient composition database created
speciﬁcally for the analysis of the zinc and phytate content of national
food supplies as reported.14 Mean estimated zinc and phytate content
(mg/100 kcal) for each food commodity was calculated, adjusting for the
eﬀects of food processing methods (eg, www.lancet.com/lancetgh Vol 3
October 2015

Articles

decortication, milling, fermentation, and nixtamalisation), according to
previous regional assumptions.2,14 The mean per-capita zinc and phytate
intakes for each country were calculated as the sum of the zinc and
phytate contribution from each food commodity. To model physiological
zinc intake at elevated [CO2], we used Monte Carlo simulations to
account for uncertainties. In the simulation, 1000 random draws were
made from the established range of altered nutrient concentrations for
each food crop or commodity to generate conﬁdence intervals (CI) which
reﬂect the precision of the estimates free of distributional
assumptions.

national populations at risk of inadequate zinc intake, assuming a
normal population distribution with a 25% interindividual variation, as
has been done in previous analyses of global risk of zinc
deﬁciency.19,20 Variation in dietary zinc requirements takes into
account both variation in requirements for absorbed zinc (ie, variations
in metabolism and rate of zinc turnover) as well as variation in the
fractional absorption of zinc. We took the diﬀerence between the
population at risk at elevated [CO2] and the population at risk under
ambient [CO2] as our measure of impact.

Statistical analysis Population at risk of zinc deﬁciency We estimated
the prevalence of inadequate zinc intake under each scenario by
comparing the estimated absorbable zinc content of the national food
supply, as above, with the population's estimated physiological
requirements for absorbed zinc. Detailed methodological and model
assumptions, as well as results based on original data, have been
described previously.2,14,15 We took risk of inadequate zinc intake
based on food balance sheet analysis as a proxy for risk of zinc
deﬁciency, and, for clarity, we use the term “risk of zinc deﬁciency”
instead of “risk of inadequate zinc intake” in our results and
discussion. The fractional absorption of zinc and the absorbable zinc
content of the daily food supply for each country under both ambient and
elevated [CO2] scenarios were predicted using a saturation response
model of zinc absorption as a function of dietary zinc and phytate (the
Miller equation).16 The age and sex distribution of country populations
estimated by the 2010 revision of the World Population Prospects17 were
used to calculate the country-speciﬁc theoretical mean daily per-capita
physiological requirement for zinc, as developed by the International
Zinc Nutrition Consultative Group.1 We used these estimates of
physiological zinc requirements because they are based on a large number
of studies among both men and women and including studies in both
developed and developing countries; they are intended to be
generalisable internationally. However, because there is a lack of
consensus on physiological requirements for zinc, we generated an
additional model using the eﬀect estimate of elevated [CO2] on nutrient
levels from the best-estimate model, but with country-speciﬁc
theoretical mean daily per-capita physiological requirements for zinc
based on the Food and Nutrition Board of the US Institute of Medicine
recommendations.18 For each scenario, we calculated the estimated
proportion of the mean physiological requirement for zinc available in
the national food supply by dividing the estimated absorbable zinc
content of the national food supply by the calculated national
physiological requirement. We then applied an estimated average
requirement cut-point-based method to estimate the proportion of
www.lancet.com/lancetgh Vol 3 October 2015

Regional classiﬁcations are based on the reporting regions of the Global
Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors 2010 Study21 with the
exception that we broke out India and China separately because of their
large population sizes. Regional and global data were weighted by
national population sizes. All statistical analyses were completed using
SAS System for Windows release 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) and
the R statistical package V 3.0. Data are presented as means (95% CI),
unless otherwise noted.

Role of the funding source The funders had no role in the study design,
data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the
report. The corresponding author had full access to the data and ﬁnal
responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

Results In a previously published meta-analysis, we found that, when
grown under open ﬁeld conditions at a [CO2] the world is expected to
experience by 2050 (roughly 550 ppm),11 wheat (--9·1%), rice (--3·1%),
barley (--13·6%), soya (--5·0%), and ﬁeld peas (--6·8%) have
signiﬁcantly reduced zinc content.10 At 550 ppm CO2, estimated percapita
zinc intake varied from a low of 8 mg/day in subSaharan Africa to 13
mg/day in China, whereas estimated phytate intake was lowest in southern
and tropical Latin America and more than twice as high in Central Asia,
North Africa, and the Middle East (table). The choice of estimates of
the physiological requirements for zinc intake has very large
implications for the proportion of the global population at risk of zinc
deﬁciency at ambient [CO2] (17% using the International Zinc Nutrition
Consultative Group model, table; and 66% using the US Institute of
Medicine Food and Nutrition Board model,14 appendix p 2). However, the
estimated eﬀect of elevated [CO2] on global risk of zinc deﬁciency using
these two models varied much less. The total number of people estimated
to be placed at new risk of zinc deﬁciency by 2050 was 138 million (95%
CI 120--156) with the International Zinc Nutrition Consultative Group
model (table) and 180 million (164--196) with the US Institute of
Medicine model e641

Articles

Highincome

Southern and tropical Latin America

Central and Central eastern and Andean Latin America Europe and
Caribbean

South Asia* India

Central Asia, Subnorth Africa, Saharan and Middle Africa East

East and southeast Asia and Paciﬁc† 21

3

Global

Number of countries

30

5

27

20

28

48

5

Population (millions)

937·2

249·4

301·4

330·1

481·4

757·8

355·0

1140·5

606·8

1337·7

6497·5

3423·9

3285·8

2776·2

Energy intake (kcal/day)

1

China

188

3031·4

2835·7

3089·2

2350·5

2233·7

2295·2

2585·2

2905·0

Zinc intake (mg/day)

12·8 (12·7--12·9)

11·9 (11·8--12·0)

10·3 (10·2--10·4)

11·2 (11·1--11·3)

13·1 (13·0--13·2)

8·0 (7·9--8·1)

9·0 (8·9--9·1)

9·3 (9·1--9·5)

8·6 (8·5--8·7)

13·2 (13·0--13·4)

10·9 (10·8--11·1)

Phytate intake (mg/day)

1162·2 (1158·8-- 1165·6)

1162·0 (1157·4-- 1166·6)

1881·7 (1880·1-- 1883·3)

1183·0 (1176·1-- 1189·9)

2702·7 (2680·3-- 2725·1)

1777·3 (1776·3-- 1778·3)

1981·2 (1953·4-- 2009·0)

2286·4 (2248·5-- 2324·3)

1436·0 (1434·6-- 1437·4)

1440·0 (1427·0-- 1453·0)

1707·3 (1699·8-- 1714·8)

Absorbable zinc intake (mg/day)

3·27 (3·26--3·28)

3·17 (3·16--3·18)

2·47 (2·45--2·49)

3·04 (3·03--3·05)

2·48 (2·47--2·49)

2·10 (2·09--2·11)

2·18 (2·17--2·19)

2·11 (2·09--2·13)

2·41 (2·40--2·42)

3·12 (3·10--3·14)

2·65 (2·64--2·66)

Proportion of mean physiological requirement of zinc available‡

158·6% (158·3-- 158·9)

162·2% (161·5-- 162·9)

129·9% (129·0-- 130·8)

146·2% (145·7-- 146·8)

129·4% (129·1-- 129·7)

118·9% (118·1-- 119·8)

118·2% (117·6-- 118·8)

110·3% (109·2-- 111·4)

124·4% (123·7-- 125·1)

153·2% (152·4-- 154·0)

135% (134·7-- 135·3)

Proportion of population with inadequate zinc intake

8·1% (8·0--8·2)

6·9% (6·7--7·1)

19% (18·4--19·6)

10·6% (10·4--10·8)

19·6% (19·4--19·8)

29·5% (28·6--30·4)

27·3% (26·6--28·0)

35·4% (34·0--36·8)

24·6% (23·8--25·4)

8·4% (8·2--8·6)

19·5% (19·2--19·8)

Absolute % increase in population with inadequate zinc intake

0·6% (0·5--0·7)

0·5% (0·3--0·6)

2·0% (1·4--2·6)

1·0% (0·8--1·2)

2·5% (2·3--2·7)

3·9% (3·0--4·8)

2·9% (2·2-- 3·6)

4·2% (2·8--5·6)

2·4% (1·6--3·2)

0·6% (0·4--0·8)

2·1% (1·8--2·3)

Relative % increase in population with inadequate zinc intake

6·9% (6·0--7·8)

6·5% (4·1--8·9)

11·1% (7·8--14·4)

10·2% (8·2--12·2)

14·6% (13·2--16·0)

14·9% (11·6--18·2)

12·2% (9·8--14·6)

13·4% (9·0--17·8)

10·4% (7·8--13·0)

7·3% (4·6--10·0)

10·6% (9·5--11·7)

1·1 (0·7--1·6)

5·9 (4·2--7·7)

3·3 (2·8--3·9)

12·2 (11·1--13·2)

29·7 (22·6--36·8)

10·4 (8·0--12·8)

47·8 (32·1--63·5)

14·8 (10·1--19·5)

7·8 (5·1--10·5)

138·4 (120·0--156·8)

5·4 Population newly at risk of (4·5--6·2) inadequate zinc intake
(millions)

Data are n or mean (95% CI). Data are weighted by national population
sizes and are for 188 countries. Regional classiﬁcations are based on
the reporting regions of the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and
Risk Factors 2010 Study, and are grouped according to geographical
location and dietary patterns. *Not including India. †Not including
China. ‡Estimated proportion of the mean physiological requirement for
zinc available in the national food supply at 550 ppm CO2.

Table: Altered risk of zinc deﬁciency under elevated [CO2] (550 ppm)
scenario, calculated regionally

(appendix p 2). Both models estimated the absolute increase in the
proportion of the global population at risk under elevated [CO2] as
2--3%. We found that populations in Africa and parts of Asia are likely
to be most aﬀected (ﬁgure 1), with increased risk in subSaharan Africa,
South Asia, and India of 3·9% (3·0--4·8), 2·9% (2·2--3·6), and 4·2%
(2·8--5·6), respectively (table). We found the population of India
particularly vulnerable to the impact of elevated [CO2] on crop
nutrients, with nearly 48 million additional people estimated to be
newly at risk of zinc deﬁciency by 2050. The decision of whether or not
to include rice in the composite index for C3 grains did not have a
large eﬀect on our results. The “best-estimate” model was considered to
be that which did not include rice in the C3 weighted mean. However,
with rice included in the composite index, we estimated 133 million
(115--150) people at new risk of zinc deﬁciency globally (appendix p 3)
compared with 138 million (120--156) when rice is not included in the
composite index. The inclusion or exclusion of rice from the composite
index or the choice of which physiological requirements to use did not
alter appreciably the order of countries most aﬀected by rising [CO2]
(appendix pp 4--5). e642

Discussion The global [CO2] in the atmosphere is expected to reach 550
ppm in the next 40--60 years, even if further actions are taken to
decrease emissions.11 These concentrations of CO2 have been shown to
reduce the nutritional value of important food crops,10 and here we show
that such nutrient reductions threaten an additional 138 million people
concentrated in Africa and south Asia with the risk of zinc deﬁciency.
Zinc deﬁciency has been consistently shown to be associated with
compromised immune function and increased susceptibility to morbidity
and mortality from infectious diseases.6,22 Our analysis does not
include the changes in the global diet that will almost certainly take
place over the next few decades while global [CO2] rises to 550 ppm. We
have tried to isolate the CO2 eﬀect by simply modelling a world in which
food availability is the same as in 2010, but the nutrient contents of
those foods have changed in response to elevated [CO2]. Anticipating how
the global diet is likely to change over the coming decades is diﬃcult.
Economic growth might allow populations to consume more calories or
receive a higher proportion of their calories from animal source foods.
However, it is also estimated that agricultural production globally will
have to roughly double by 2050 in order to keep up with
www.lancet.com/lancetgh Vol 3 October 2015

Articles

Absolute % increase in estimated prevalence of inadequate zinc intake
2·4--3·1 0·05--0·40 3·2--4·0 0·41--0·73 4·1--5·8 0·74--1·2 5·9--7·1
1·3--1·7 7·2--9·9 1·8--2·3 Data not available

Figure 1: Absolute percentage increase in risk of zinc deﬁciency in
response to elevated atmospheric [CO2]

increased demand,23 and the combination of water scarcity, arable land
degradation, and climate change represent very signiﬁcant obstacles to
such increases in production.24 Because of this complexity, we believe
the simplest approach is to model diets that are unchanged with respect
to calories and composition, an achievement that many would consider
optimistic in the face of rapidly changing environmental conditions. We
have also made no attempt to account for population growth in our
analysis. The human population is expected to rise to between 9 and 10
billion by 2050,25 but we have used 2010 estimates of population size
for our analysis. This means that our estimates of individuals likely to
be placed at risk of zinc deﬁciency are almost certainly a considerable
underestimate. A simple scaling of population growth to the eﬀect we
have measured would lead us to conclude that, in fact, 187 million
people (using 9·5 billion as an estimate of the 2050 global population)
are likely to become newly zinc deﬁcient as a result of increased [CO2].
And the fact that most of this population growth is expected to occur in
the regions that are disproportionately aﬀected by the nutritional
consequences of rising [CO2] suggests that even this number is likely to
be an underestimate. However, to maintain the most transparent analysis
possible with the fewest assumptions, we have not attempted to project
these demographic changes but believe that our results are a
conservative estimate. One assumption we do make for this study is that
eﬀects of elevated [CO2] on crop nutrients that have been quantiﬁed in
developed country settings for a subset of crops and cultivars consumed
globally can be generalised to estimate nutrient intakes around the
world. Of course, to be certain of the nutritional eﬀects of elevated
[CO2] on the global population we would need to conduct FACE experiments
for every consumed cultivar of every food crop in every country---an
undertaking that is not feasible. But we are reassured that having found
a very www.lancet.com/lancetgh Vol 3 October 2015

similar pattern of eﬀects across 41 diﬀerent cultivars of six diﬀerent
food crops grown on three continents in seven locations over 10 years
under vastly diﬀerent growing conditions,10 that these nutrient changes
are a robust ﬁnding and are likely to be similar across the diﬀerent
growing conditions around the world. This assumption was also recently
supported by a broad metaanalysis showing similar changes in the
nutrient content of a diverse number of plants across many plant tissues
and many locations.26 An additional conservative assumption embedded in
this analysis is that food availability in populations around the world
is in proportion to physiological requirements. Children younger than 5
years and women (especially during pregnancy) are likely to be at
increased risk of zinc deﬁciency owing to increased nutrient
requirements. The assumed optimal distribution of foods is unlikely to
be met in most settings, but in the absence of global data on food
distributions an assumption must be made, and this assumption is the
most conservative approach. Less optimal food distributions would lead
to increased eﬀects of elevated [CO2] on risk of zinc deﬁciency.
Finally, we have assumed that there is no change in the zinc content of
animal source foods. There is clear evidence that most plants, not just
food crops, have lower concentrations of zinc when grown at elevated
[CO2]. Meta-analyses of plants that include many diﬀerent tissues from a
variety of grasses, trees, and shrubs show consistent reductions in zinc
content,26 making it likely that animal forage would have reduced zinc
content in a world experiencing higher atmospheric [CO2]. However, there
are no data available on how these changes in the nutrient content of
forage might alter the concentrations of zinc in animal source foods
such as meat, milk, or eggs. Until such data are available, we can only
assume no change in nutrient concentrations, but this, too, is likely to
lead to underestimates of the impact of rising [CO2] on risk of zinc
deﬁciency. e643

Articles

Declaration of interests We declare no competing interests.

Increase of risk of zinc deficiency (%)

10

Acknowledgments This research was funded by grants from the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation and the Winslow Foundation. We gratefully
acknowledge Missy Holbrook, Peter Huybers, Dan Schrag, Walter Willett,
and Kenneth Brown for their valuable conceptual input into this project.
5

0

0

50

100

Zinc from animal-source foods (%)

Figure 2: Correlation between proportion of dietary zinc received from
animal-source foods and risk of new zinc deﬁciency in response to
elevated [CO2] Data are derived from analysis of food balance sheets.
Percentage of dietary zinc availability from animal-source foods was
calculated by dividing amount of per-capita daily bioavailable zinc from
animal-source foods by total per-capita daily bioavailable zinc
estimates. The percentage increase in risk of zinc deﬁciency was
calculated as described in the Methods section of this manuscript. Zinc
content in animal-source foods is assumed to remain unchanged.

The eﬀect we have identiﬁed highlights an issue of social justice.
Wealthier people are associated with higher CO2 emissions,27 whereas the
people who are most vulnerable to the nutritional eﬀects of rising [CO2]
are those who receive the smallest proportion of their dietary zinc from
animal source foods (ﬁgure 2). These tend to be the poorest people
within a country or region. The wealthy world's CO2 emissions are
putting the poor in harm's way. By modelling national data for 188
countries, we identify populations who are at highest risk of increased
zinc deﬁciency as a consequence of rising [CO2]. These populations could
be the target of interventions designed to address this risk. Such
interventions might include zinc supplementation, fortiﬁcation of staple
foods with additional zinc, the application of zinc-containing
fertilisers to crops, and the development and introduction of
biofortiﬁed crop strains such as rice and wheat. Earlier work has also
shown that, at least for rice, diﬀerent cultivars of a crop show
diﬀerent levels of sensitivity to the [CO2] eﬀect on zinc content which
could provide an opportunity for breeding crop cultivars with lower
nutritional sensitivity to rising [CO2].10 Anthropogenic change to
Earth's natural systems will aﬀect human health in multiple ways through
pathways that are often quite complex.28 Here we describe one such
pathway that would have been challenging to anticipate in advance of the
experimental data. We suspect that there will be others as human
transformation of natural systems becomes increasingly profound and
pervasive. Contributors SSM designed the study. KRW and IK led the data
analysis. AZ and JS provided statistical support. All authors
contributed to data interpretation and the writing of the article.

e644

References 1 Brown K, Rivera J, Bhutta Z, Gibson R, King J. Assessment
of the risk of zinc deﬁciency in populations and options for its
control. Food Nutr Bull 2004; 25: s99--203. 2 Wessells KR, Brown KH.
Estimating the global prevalence of zinc deﬁciency: results based on
zinc availability in national food supplies and the prevalence of
stunting. PLoS One 2012; 7: e50568. 3 Hess S, King J. Eﬀects of maternal
zinc supplementation on pregnancy and lactation outcomes. Food Nutr Bull
2009; 30: s60--78. 4 Haase H, Rink L. Multiple impacts of zinc on immune
function. Metallonomics 2014; 6: 1175--80. 5 Fu W, Ding LR, Zhuang C,
Zhou YH. Eﬀects of zinc supplementation on the incidence of mortality in
preschool children: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
PLoS One 2013; 8: e79998. 6 Yakoob MY, Theodoratou E, Jabeen A, et al.
Preventive zinc supplementation in developing countries: impact on
mortality and morbidity due to diarrhea, pneumonia and malaria. BMC
Public Health 2011; 11 (suppl 3): S3--23. 7 Brown KH, Peerson J, Baker
SK, Hess SY. Preventive zinc supplementation among infants,
preschoolers, and older prepubertal children. Food Nutr Bull 2009; 30
(suppl 1): S12--40. 8 Lassi ZS, Haider BA, Bhutta ZA. Zinc
supplementation for the prevention of pneumonia in children aged 2
months to 59 months. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 12: CD005978. 9
Black RE, Victora CG, Walker SP, et al. Maternal and child
undernutrition and overweight in low-income and middle-income countries.
Lancet 2013; 382: 427--51. 10 Myers SS, Zanobetti A, Kloog I, et al.
Increasing CO2 threatens human nutrition. Nature 2014; 510: 139--42. 11
Fisher BS, Nakicenovic N, Alfsen K, et al. Issues related to mitigation
in the long term context. In: Metz B, Davidson OR, Bosch PR, Dave R,
Meyer LA, eds. Climate change 2007: mitigation contribution of working
group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-governmental
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007:
169--250. 12 Food and Agriculture Organization. Food balance sheets,
1970--2007. http://faostat.fao.org (accessed Feb 8, 2011). 13 Global
Greenhouse Gas Reference Network. Moana Loa CO2 annual mean data, 2015.
http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/ trends/#mlo\_data (accessed June 11,
2015). 14 Wessells KR, Singh GM, Brown KH. Estimating the global
prevalence of inadequate zinc intake from national food balance sheets:
eﬀects of methodological assumptions. PLoS One 2012; 7: e50565. 15
Wuehler SE, Peerson JM, Brown KH. Use of national food balance data to
estimate the adequacy of zinc in national food supplies: methodology and
regional estimates. Public Health Nutr 2005; 8: 812--19. 16 Miller LV,
Krebs NF, Hambidge MK. A mathematical model of zinc absorption in humans
as a function of dietary zinc and phytate. J Nutr 2007; 137: 135--41. 17
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs, Population
Division. World population prospects: the 2010 revision. New York:
United Nations, 2011. http://esa.un.org/wpp/
Documentation/WPP%202010%20publications.htm (accessed July 8, 2015). 18
Panel on Micronutrients, Subcommittees on Upper Reference Levels of
Nutrients and of Interpretation and Use of Dietary Reference Intakes,
and the Standing Committee on the Scientiﬁc Evaluation of Dietary
Reference Intakes. Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K,
arsenic, boron, chromium, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel,
silicon, vanadium, and zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press,
2001.

www.lancet.com/lancetgh Vol 3 October 2015

Articles

19

20 21

22

23

Caulﬁeld LE, Black RE. Zinc deﬁciency. In: Ezzati M, Lopez AD, Rodgers
A, Murray CJL, eds. Comparative quantiﬁcation of health risks: global
and regional burden of disease attribution to selected major risk
factors. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2004. WHO. Zinc: trace
elements in human nutrition and health. Geneva: World Health
Organization, 1996. Rajaratnam JK, Marcus JR, Flaxman AD, et al.
Neonatal, postneonatal, childhood, and under-5 mortality for 187
countries, 1970--2010: a systematic analysis of progress towards
Millennium Development Goal 4. Lancet 2010; 375: 1988--2008. Brown K,
Peerson J, Baker S, Hess S. Preventive zinc supplementation among
infants, preschoolers, and older prepubertal children. Food Nutr Bull
2009; 30: s12--40. Alexandratos N. World food and agriculture: outlook
for the medium and longer term. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96:
5908--14.

www.lancet.com/lancetgh Vol 3 October 2015

24

25

26

27

28

Myers SS, Patz J. Emerging threats to human health from global
environmental change. Annu Rev Environ Resources 2009; 34: 223--52.
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs, Population
Division. World population prospects: the 2012 revision. New York:
United Nations, 2013. Loladze I. Hidden shift of the ionome of plants
exposed to elevated CO2 depletes minerals at the base of human
nutrition. eLife 2014; 10.7554/eLife.02245. Patz JA, Gibbs HK, Foley JA,
Rogers JV, Smith KR. Climate change and global health: quantifying a
growing ethical crisis. EcoHealth 2007; 4: 397--405. Myers SS, Gaﬃkin L,
Golden CD, et al. Human health impacts of ecosystem alteration. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110: 18753--60.

e645


