LETTER ;

doi:10.1038/nature13179

Rising concentration of atmospheric CO2 threatens human nutrition Samuel
S. Myers1,2, Antonella Zanobetti1, Itai Kloog1,3, Peter Huybers4, Andrew
D. B. Leakey5, Arnold Bloom6, Eli Carlisle6, Lee H. Dietterich7, Glenn
Fitzgerald8, Toshihiro Hasegawa9, N. Michele Holbrook10, Randall L.
Nelson11, Michael J. Ottman12, Victor Raboy13, Hidemitsu Sakai9, Karla
A. Sartor14, Joel Schwartz1, Saman Seneweera15, Michael Tausz16 &
Yasuhiro Usui9

Dietary deficiencies of zinc and iron are a substantial global public
health problem. An estimated two billion people suffer these
deficiencies1, causing a loss of 63 million life-years annually2,3. Most
of these people depend on C3 grains and legumes as their primary dietary
source of zinc and iron. Here we report that C3 grains and legumes have
lower concentrations of zinc and iron when grown under field conditions
at the elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration predicted for the middle
of this century. C3 crops other than legumes also have lower
concentrations of protein, whereas C4 crops seem to be less affected.
Differences between cultivars of a single crop suggest that breeding for
decreased sensitivity to atmospheric CO2 concentration could partly
address these new challenges to global health. In the 1990s, several
investigators found that elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration
(hereafter abbreviated to [CO2]) decreased the concentrations of zinc,
iron and protein in grains of wheat4--7, barley5 and rice8 grown in
controlled-environment chambers. However, subsequent studies failed to
replicate these results when plants were grown in open-top chambers and
free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE) experiments. A previous study9 found no
effect of [CO2] on the concentrations of zinc or iron in rice grains
grown under FACE and suggested that the earlier findings had been
influenced by ‘pot effects', by which a small rooting volume led to
nutrient dilution at the root--soil interface. Of the more recent
studies10--13, most have indicated lower elemental concentrations in
soybeans10, sorghum10, potatoes11, wheat12 or barley13 grown at elevated
[CO2], but with the exception of iron in one study on wheat12, these
results were statistically insignificant, perhaps because of small
sample sizes. Small sample sizes have limited the statistical power of
individual studies of many aspects of plant responses to elevated [CO2],
and metaanalyses involving larger samples of genotypes, environmental
conditions and experimental locations have been important in resolving
which elements of plant function respond reliably to altered [CO2]14,15.
A recent meta-analysis of published data concluded that only sulphur is
decreased in grains grown at elevated [CO2]16. Here we report findings
from a meta-analysis of newly acquired data from 143 comparisons of the
edible portions of crops grown at ambient and elevated [CO2] from seven
different FACE experimental locations in Japan, Australia and the United
States involving six food crops (see Table 1). We tested the nutrient
concentrations of the edible portions of rice (Oryza sativa, 18
cultivars), wheat (Triticum aestivum, 8 cultivars), maize (Zea mays, 2
cultivars), soybeans (Glycine max, 7 cultivars), field peas (Pisum
sativum, 4 cultivars) and sorghum (Sorghum

bicolor, 1 cultivar). In all, forty genotypes were tested over one to
six growing seasons at ambient and elevated [CO2], where the latter was
in the range 546--586 p.p.m. across all seven study sites. Collectively,
these experiments contribute more than tenfold more data regarding both
the zinc and iron content of the edible portions of crops grown under
FACE conditions than is currently available in the literature.
Consistent with earlier meta-analyses of other aspects of plant function
under FACE conditions14,15, we considered the response comparisons
observed from different species, cultivars and stress treatments and
from different years to be independent. The natural logarithm of the
mean response ratio (r 5 response in elevated [CO2]/response in ambient
[CO2]) was used as the metric for all analyses. Meta-analysis was used
to estimate the overall effect of elevated [CO2] on the concentration of
each nutrient in a particular crop and to determine the significance of
this effect (see Methods). We found that elevated [CO2] was associated
with significant decreases in the concentrations of zinc and iron in all
C3 grasses and legumes (Fig. 1 and Extended Data Table 1). For example,
wheat grains grown at elevated [CO2] had 9.3% (95% confidence interval
(CI) 212.7 to 25.9) lower zinc and 5.1% (95% CI 26.5 to 23.7) lower iron
than those grown at ambient [CO2]. We also found that elevated [CO2] was
associated with lower protein content in C3 grasses, with a 6.3% (95% CI
27.5 to 25.2) decrease in wheat grains and a 7.8% (95% CI 28.9 to 26.8)
decrease in rice grains. Elevated [CO2] was associated with a small
decrease in protein in field peas, and there was no significant effect
in soybeans or C4 crops (Fig. 1 and Extended Data Table 1). In addition
to our own observations, we obtained data from 10 of 11 previously
published studies investigating nutrient changes in the edible portion
of food crops (Extended Data Table 6) and combined these data with our
own observations in a larger meta-analysis. Analysis of our results
combined with previously published FACE data (Extended Data Table 2), or
combined with previously published data from both FACE and chamber
experiments (Extended Data Table 3), was consistent with the results
obtained using only our new data. Combining our data with previously
published data did not alter the significance or substantially alter the
effect size of the nutrient changes for any crop or any nutrient. In
addition to nutrient concentrations, we also measured phytate, a
phosphate storage molecule present in most plants that inhibits the
absorption of dietary zinc in the human gut17. We had no a priori reason
to assume that phytate concentrations would change in response to rising
[CO2]. However, formulae for calculating absorbed, or bioavailable, zinc
depend on both the amount of dietary zinc and the amount of dietary
phytate consumed17, making it important to interpret changes in zinc
concentration in the context of possible changes in phytate.

1

Health, Department of Environmental Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA. 2Harvard University Center for the Environment, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA. 3The Department of Geography and Environmental
Development, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, PO Box 653, Beer Sheva,
Israel. 4Department of Earth and Planetary Science, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. 5 Department of Plant Biology and
Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. 6Department of Plant
Sciences, University of California at Davis, Davis, California 95616,
USA. 7University of Pennsylvania, Department of Biology, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. 8Department of Environment and Primary
Industries, Horsham, Victoria 3001, Australia. 9 National Institute for
Agro-Environmental Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8604, Japan.
10Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. 11 United States Department of
Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, Soybean/Maize Germplasm,
Pathology, and Genetics Research Unit, Department of Crop Sciences,
University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. 12School of Plant
Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA. 13United
States Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service,
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210, USA. 14The Nature Conservancy, Santa Fe, New
Mexico 87544, USA. 15Department of Agriculture and Food Systems,
Melbourne School of Land and Environment, The University of Melbourne,
Creswick, Victoria 3010, Australia. 16 Department of Forest and
Ecosystem Science, Melbourne School of Land and Environment, The
University of Melbourne, Creswick, Victoria 3010, Australia. 0 0 M O N T
H 2 0 1 4 | VO L 0 0 0 | N AT U R E | 1

RESEARCH LETTER Table 1 | Characteristics of agricultural experiments
Crops

Country

Treatments used

Years grown

Wheat Site 1

Australia

2007--2010

4

8

382/546--550

Site 2

Australia

2007--2009

4

1

382/546--550

Field peas Rice Site 1

Australia

2 water levels, 2 nitrogen treatments, 2 sowing times 1 water level, 1
nitrogen treatment, 2 sowing times 2 water levels

2010

4

4

382/546--550

Japan

2007--2008

3

3

376--379/570--576

Site 2

Japan

2010

4

18

2008 2001, 2002, 2004, 2006--2008 1998--1999

4 4

2 7

385/550 372--385/550

4

1

363--373/556--579

Maize Soybeans

United States United States

1 nitrogen treatment, 2 warming treatments 3 nitrogen treatments, 2
warming treatments 2 nitrogen treatments 1 treatment

Sorghum

United States

2 water levels

Number of replicates

Number of cultivars

CO2 ambient/elevated (p.p.m.)

386/584

‘Number of replicates' refers to the number of identical cultivars grown
under identical conditions in the same year and location but in separate
FACE rings.

Phytate content decreased significantly at elevated [CO2] only in wheat
(P , 0.01). This decrease might offset some of the declines in zinc for
this particular crop, although the decrease was slightly less than half
of the decrease in zinc. For other crops examined, however, the lack of
a concurrent decrease in phytate may further exacerbate problems of zinc
deficiency. The global [CO2] in the atmosphere is expected to reach 550
p.p.m. in the next 40--60 years, even if further actions are taken to
decrease emissions18. At these concentrations, we find that the edible
portions of many of the key crops for human nutrition have decreased
nutritional value when compared with the same plants grown under
identical conditions but at the present ambient [CO2]. Analysis of the
United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization food balance sheets
reveals that in 2010 roughly 2.3 billion people were living in countries
whose populations received at least 60% of their dietary zinc and/or
iron from C3 grains and legumes, and 1.9 billion lived in countries that
received at least 70% of one or both of these nutrients from these crops
(Extended Data Table 5). Reductions in the zinc and iron content of the
edible portion of these food crops will increase the risk of zinc and
iron deficiencies across these populations and will add to the already
considerable burden of disease associated with them. The implications of
decreased protein concentrations in nonleguminous C3 crops are less
clear. From a study of adult men and women in the United States, there
is strong evidence that the substitution

of dietary carbohydrate for dietary protein increased the risk of
hypertension, lipid disorders, and 10-year coronary heart disease
risk19. For the developing world, minimum protein requirements for
different demographic groups are an area of active research and
debate20. For countries such as India, however, in which up to one-third
of the rural population is thought to be at risk of not meeting protein
requirements21 and in which most protein comes in the form of C3
grains21, decreased protein content in non-leguminous C3 crops may have
serious consequences for public health. Whereas zinc and iron were
significantly decreased in all C3 crops tested, only iron in maize was
observed to decrease among the C4 crops. No changes were found in
sorghum. That zinc and iron declines were notable in C3 crops but less
so in C4 crops is consistent with differences in physiology. C4 crops
concentrate CO2 internally, which results in photosynthesis being
CO2-saturated even under ambient [CO2] conditions, leading to no
stimulation of photosynthetic carbon assimilation at elevated [CO2]
levels under mesic growing conditions22. Our finding that protein
content was less affected in legumes than in other C3 crops is also
physiologically consistent with the general ability of leguminous crops
to match the stimulation of photosynthetic carbon gain at elevated [CO2]
with greater nitrogen fixation, to maintain tissue carbon:nitrogen (C:N)
ratios23. In contrast, most temperate non-legume C3 crops are generally
unable to extract and assimilate sufficient nitrogen from soils to
maintain tissue C:N ratios24,25.

15

Change (%)

10 5 0 --5 --10

Wheat (64)

Rice (31)

Field peas (10)

C3 grasses

Figure 1 | Percentage change (with 95% confidence intervals) in
nutrients at elevated [CO2] relative to ambient [CO2]. Numbers in
parentheses refer to the number of comparisons in which replicates of a
particular cultivar grown at a specific site under one set of growing
conditions in one year at elevated [CO2] have been pooled and for which
mean nutrient values for these replicates are 2 | N AT U R E | VO L 0 0
0 | 0 0 M O N T H 2 0 1 4

Nature nature13179.3d 21/3/14 13:30:42

Soybeans (25)

C3 legumes

Maize (4)

Zn Fe Protein Phytate

Zn Fe Protein Phytate

Zn Fe Protein Phytate

Zn Fe Protein Phytate

Zn Fe Protein Phytate

Zn Fe Protein Phytate

--15

Sorghum (4)

C4 grasses

compared with mean values for identical cultivars under identical
growing conditions except grown at ambient [CO2]. In most instances,
data from four replicates were pooled for each value, meaning that eight
experiments were combined for each comparison (see Table 1 for details
of experiments).

LETTER RESEARCH

Change (%)

a

10 0 --10 --20

Wheat

Rice

Field peas

C3 grasses

b

Soybeans C3 legumes

Cv34B43 DKC61-19

Clark Dwight Flyer Loda Pana Spencer Williams

Bohatyr Kaspa OZP0601 OZP0902 Sturt

86Y8 Aikoku Akidawara Akihikari Akita63 Akitakomachi Bekoaoba Hoshiaoba
IR72 Kokuriku193 Koshihikari Lemont Milyang23 Miriroman Nihonbare Norin8
SY63 Takanari

Drysdale Gladius H45 Hartog Janz Silverstar Yitpi Zebu

--30

Maize C4 grasses

10

Change (%)

0 --10 --20

Wheat

Rice

Field peas

C3 grasses

c

Soybeans C3 legumes

Cv34B43 DKC61-19

Clark Dwight Flyer Loda Pana Spencer Williams

Bohatyr Kaspa OZP0601 OZP0902 Sturt

86Y8 Aikoku Akidawara Akihikari Akita63 Akitakomachi Bekoaoba Hoshiaoba
IR72 Kokuriku193 Koshihikari Lemont Milyang23 Miriroman Nihonbare Norin8
SY63 Takanari

Drysdale Gladius H45 Hartog Janz Silverstar Yitpi Zebu

--30

Maize C4 grasses

10

Change (%)

0 --10 --20

Wheat

Rice C3 grasses

Field peas

Soybeans C3 legumes

Cv34B43 DKC61-19

Clark Dwight Flyer Loda Pana Spencer Williams

Bohatyr Kaspa OZP0601 OZP0902 Sturt

86Y8 Aikoku Akidawara Akihikari Akita63 Akitakomachi Bekoaoba Hoshiaoba
IR72 Kokuriku193 Koshihikari Lemont Milyang23 Miriroman Nihonbare Norin8
SY63 Takanari

Drysdale Gladius H45 Hartog Janz Silverstar Yitpi Zebu

--30

Maize C4 grasses

Figure 2 | Percentage change (with 95% confidence intervals) in
nutrients at elevated [CO2] relative to ambient [CO2], by cultivar. a,
Zinc; b, iron; c, protein.

Little is known about the mechanism(s) responsible for the decline in
nutrient concentrations associated with elevated [CO2]. Some authors
have proposed ‘carbohydrate dilution', by which CO2-stimulated
carbohydrate production by plants dilutes the rest of the grain
components26. To test this hypothesis, we measured concentrations of
additional elements for all crops except wheat (Extended Data Table 4).
Our findings were inconsistent with carbohydrate dilution operating
alone. If only passive dilution of nutrients were occurring, we would
have expected to see very similar changes in the concentration of each
nutrient tested for a given crop. In contrast, we found that elemental
changes in the individual crops seemed distinct from each other. For
example, in rice grains (Extended Data Table 4) the decrease in zinc
concentrations associated with elevated [CO2] was significantly
different from the decreases in the concentrations of copper (P #
0.001), calcium (P # 0.001), boron (P # 0.001) and phosphate (P 5
0.010). This heterogeneous response was also observed in recent analyses
reviewing possible mechanisms for nutrient changes in both edible and
non-edible plant tissues grown at elevated [CO2]27. It also seems that
the mechanism(s) causing these changes operate distinctly in different
species. In one instance, for example, we found boron to be
significantly decreased in soybeans (P # 0.001), whereas it was
significantly elevated in rice grains (P # 0.001). Although these
differences may, in part, have derived from different environmental
conditions, they suggest that the mechanism is more complex than
carbohydrate dilution alone. Of all the elements, changes in nitrogen
content at elevated [CO2] have been the most studied, and inhibition of
photorespiration and malate production24, carbohydrate dilution26,

slower uptake of nitrogen in roots25 and decreased transpiration-driven
mass flow of nitrogen7 may all be significant. We examined the effects
of elevated [CO2] on zinc, iron and protein content as a function of
cultivar when data were available (Fig. 2). Whereas most crops showed
negligible differences across cultivars, concentrations of zinc and iron
across rice cultivars varied substantially (P 5 0.04 and P 5 0.03,
respectively; Fig. 2a, b). Such differences between cultivars suggest a
basis for breeding rice cultivars whose micronutrient levels are less
vulnerable to increasing [CO2]. Similar effects may occur in other
crops, given that the statistical power of many of our other
inter-cultivar tests was limited by sample size. We note, however, that
such breeding programmes will not be a panacea for many reasons
including the affordability of improved seeds and the numerous criteria
used by farmers in making planting decisions that include taste,
tradition, marketability, growing requirements and yield. In addition,
as has been noted previously, there are likely to be trade-offs with
respect to yield and other performance characteristics when breeding for
increased zinc and iron content28. The public health implications of
global climate change are difficult to predict, and we expect many
surprises. The finding that raising atmospheric [CO2] lowers the
nutritional value of C3 food crops is one such surprise that we can now
predict and prepare for. In addition to efforts to retard the elevation
of future [CO2], it may be important to develop breeding programmes
designed to decrease the vulnerability of key crops to these changes.
Nutritional analysis of which human populations are most vulnerable to
decreased dietary availability of zinc, iron 0 0 M O N T H 2 0 1 4 | VO
L 0 0 0 | N AT U R E | 3

RESEARCH LETTER and protein from C3 crops could help to target response
efforts, including breeding decreased sensitivity to elevated [CO2],
biofortification, and supplementation.

METHODS SUMMARY We examined the response of nutrient levels to elevated
atmospheric [CO2] for the edible portions of rice (Oryza sativa, 18
cultivars), wheat (Triticum aestivum, 8 cultivars), maize (Zea mays, 2
cultivars), soybeans (Glycine max, 7 cultivars), field peas (Pisum
sativum, 4 cultivars) and sorghum (Sorghum bicolor, 1 cultivar). The six
crops were grown under FACE conditions; in all six experiments, the
elevated [CO2] was in the range 546--586 p.p.m. In accordance with
methods described previously14,15, the natural logarithm of the response
ratio (r 5 response in elevated [CO2]/response in ambient [CO2]) was
used as the metric for analyses and is reported as the mean percentage
change (100 3 (r 2 1)) at elevated [CO2]. Consistent with these earlier
analyses of multiple species grown under FACE conditions, the responses
of different species, cultivars and stress treatments and from different
years of the FACE experiments were considered to be independent and
suited to meta-analytic analysis14. The meta-analysis was designed to
estimate the effect of elevated [CO2] on the concentration of each
nutrient in a particular crop and to determine the significance of this
effect relative to a null hypothesis of no change. All tests were
conducted as two-sided; that is, not specifying which direction the
nutrient concentrations were expected to change under elevated [CO2].
Meta-analysis was conducted with a linear mixed model. Parameter
estimates were obtained by the restricted maximum-likelihood method, a
standard approach for analysing repeated measurements29 that, in our
case, were of nutrient concentrations at the time of harvest. Results
for all analyses are reported as the best estimate of percentage changes
in the concentration of nutrients along with the 95% confidence
intervals associated with each estimate. Two-tailed P values are also
reported. Full Methods and any associated references are available in
the online version of the paper. Received 25 November 2013; accepted 24
February 2014. Published online XX 2014. 1. 2.

3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
7.  
8.  
9.  
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 

Tulchinsky, T. H. Micronutrient deficiency conditions: global health
issues. Public Health Rev. 32, 243--255 (2010). Caulfield, L. E. &
Black, R. E. in Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: Global and
Regional Burden of Disease Attribution to Selected Major Risk Factors
(eds Ezzati, M., Lopez, A. D., Rodgers, A. & Murray, C. J. L.) Vol. 1,
Ch. 5 (World Health Organization, 2004). Stoltzfus, R. J., Mullany, L. &
Black, R. E. in Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: Global and
Regional Burden of Disease Attribution to Selected Major Risk Factors
(eds Ezzati, M., Lopez, A. D., Rodgers, A. & Murray, C. J. L.) Vol. 1,
Ch. 3 (World Health Organization, 2004). De la Puente, L. S., Perez, P.
P., Martinez-Carrasco, R., Morcuende, R. M. & Del Molino, I. M. M.
Action of elevated CO2 and high temperatures on the mineral chemical
composition of two varieties of wheat. Agrochimica 44, 221--230 (2000).
Manderscheid, R., Bender, J., Jager, H. J. & Weigel, H. J. Effects of
season long CO2 enrichment on cereals. II. Nutrient concentrations and
grain quality. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 54, 175--185 (1995). Fangmeier,
A., Grüters, U., Högy, P., Vermehren, B. & Jäger, H.-J. Effects of
elevated CO2, nitrogen supply and tropospheric ozone on spring wheat.
II. Nutrients (N, P, K, S, Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn, Zn). Environ. Pollut. 96,
43--59 (1997). Pleijel, H. et al. Effects of elevated carbon dioxide,
ozone and water availability on spring wheat growth and yield. Physiol.
Plant. 108, 61--70 (2000). Seneweera, S. P. & Conroy, J. P. Growth,
grain yield and quality of rice (Oryza sativa L.) in response to
elevated CO2 and phosphorus nutrition. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 43,
1131--1136 (1997). Lieffering, M., Kim, H.-Y., Kobayashi, K. & Okada, M.
The impact of elevated CO2 on the elemental concentrations of
field-grown rice grains. Field Crops Res. 88, 279--286 (2004). Prior, S.
A., Runion, G. B., Rogers, H. H. & Torbert, H. A. Effects of atmospheric
CO2 enrichment on crop nutrient dynamics under no-till conditions. J.
Plant Nutr. 31, 758--773 (2008). Högy, P. & Fangmeier, A. Atmospheric
CO2 enrichment affects potatoes. 2. Tuber quality traits. Eur. J. Agron.
30, 85--94 (2009). Högy, P. et al. Effects of elevated CO2 on grain
yield and quality of wheat: results from a 3-year free-air CO2
enrichment experiment. Plant Biol. 11, 60--69 (2009). Erbs, M. et al.
Effects of free-air CO2 enrichment and nitrogen supply on grain quality
parameters and elemental composition of wheat and barley grown in a crop
rotation. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 136, 59--68 (2010).

4 | N AT U R E | VO L 0 0 0 | 0 0 M O N T H 2 0 1 4

Nature nature13179.3d 21/3/14 13:30:46

14. Ainsworth, E. A. & Long, S. P. What have we learned from 15 years of
    free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE)? A meta-analytic review of the
    responses of photosynthesis, canopy properties and plant production
    to rising CO2. New Phytol. 165, 351--372 (2005).
15. Curtis, P. S. & Wang, X. A meta-analysis of elevated CO2 effects on
    woody plant mass, form, and physiology. Oecologia 113, 299--313
    (1998).
16. Duval, B. D., Blankinship, J. C., Dijkstra, P. & Hungate, B. A. CO2
    effects on plant nutrient concentration depend on plant functional
    group and available nitrogen: a meta-analysis. Plant Ecol. 213,
    505--521 (2012).
17. Miller, L. V., Krebs, N. F. & Hambidge, M. K. A mathematical model
    of zinc absorption in humans as a function of dietary zinc and
    phytate. J. Nutr. 137, 135--141 (2007).
18. Fisher, B. S. et al. in Climate Change 2007: Mitigation.
    Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of
    the Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change (eds Metz, B. et al.)
    169--250 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007).
19. Appel, L. J. et al. Effects of protein, monounsaturated fat, and
    carbohydrate intake on blood pressure and serum lipids: results of
    the OmniHeart randomized trial. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 294, 2455--2464
    (2005).
20. Millward, D. Joe. Identifying recommended dietary allowances for
    protein and amino acids: a critique of the 2007 WHO/FAO/UNU report.
    Br. J. Nutr. 108, S3--S21 (2012).
21. Swaminathan, S., Vaz, M. & Kurpad, A. V. Protein intakes in India.
    Br. J. Nutr. 108, S50--S58 (2012).
22. Leakey, A. Rising atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration and the
    future of C4 crops for food and fuel. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 276,
    2333--2343 (2009).
23. Rogers, A., Ainsworth, E. A. & Leakey, A. D. Will elevated carbon
    dioxide concentration amplify the benefits of nitrogen fixation in
    legumes? Plant Physiol. 151, 1009--1016 (2009).
24. Bloom, A. J. et al. CO2 enrichment inhibits shoot nitrate
    assimilation in C3 but not C4 plants and slows growth under nitrate
    in C3 plants. Ecology 93, 355--367 (2012).
25. Leakey, A. D. et al. Elevated CO2 effects on plant carbon, nitrogen,
    and water relations: six important lessons from FACE. J. Exp. Bot.
    60, 2859--2876 (2009).
26. Gifford, R., Barrett, D. & Lutze, J. The effects of elevated [CO2]
    on the C:N and C:P mass ratios of plant tissues. Plant Soil 224,
    1--14, 10.1023/A:1004790612630 (2000).
27. McGrath, J. M. & Lobell, D. B. Reduction of transpiration and
    altered nutrient allocation contribute to nutrient decline of crops
    grown in elevated CO2 concentrations. Plant Cell Environ. 36,
    697--705, 10.1111/pce.12007 (2013).
28. Monasterio, I. & Graham, R. D. Breeding for trace minerals in wheat.
    Food Nutr. Bull. 21, 392--396 (2000).
29. Searle, S. R., Casella, G. & McCulloch, C. E. Variance Components
    (Wiley, 1992). Acknowledgements We thank L. S. De la Puente, M.
    Erbs, A. Fangmeier, P. Högy, M. Lieffering, R. Manderscheid, H.
    Pleijel and S. Prior for sharing data from their groups with us; H.
    Nakamura, T. Tokida, C. Zhu and S. Yoshinaga for contributions to
    the rice FACE project; and M. Hambidge, W. Willett, D. Schrag, K.
    Brown, R. Wessells, N. Fernando, J. Peerson and B. Kimball for
    reviews of earlier drafts or conceptual contributions to this
    project. V.R. thanks A. Lewis for her efforts in producing the
    phytate data included here. The National Agricultural Research
    Organization (Japan) provided the grain samples of some rice
    cultivars. We thank the following for financial support of this
    work: the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; the Winslow Foundation;
    the Commonwealth Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
    (Australia), the International Plant Nutrition Institute,
    (Australia), the Grains Research and Development Corporation
    (Australia), the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
    (Japan); the National Science Foundation (NSF IOS-08-18435);
    research at SoyFACE was supported by the US Department of
    Agriculture Agricultural Research Service; Illinois Council for Food
    and Agricultural Research (CFAR); Department of Energy's Office of
    Science (BER) Midwestern Regional Center of the National Institute
    for Climatic Change Research at Michigan Technological University,
    under Award Number DEFC02- 06ER64158; and the National Research
    Initiative of Agriculture and Food Research Initiative Competitive
    Grants Program Grant no. 2010--65114--20343 from the USDA National
    Institute of Food and Agriculture. Early stages of this work
    received support from Harvard Catalyst j The Harvard Clinical and
    Translational Science Center (National Center for Research Resources
    and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences,
    National Institutes of Health Award 8UL1TR000170-05). Author
    Contributions S.S.M. conceived the overall project and drafted the
    manuscript. A.Z., I.K., J.S. and P.H. performed statistical
    analyses. P.H. and A.D.B.L. provided substantial input into methods
    descriptions. A.B., E.C. and V.R. analysed grain samples for
    nutrient content. G.F., T.H., A.D.B.L., R.L.N., M.J.O., H.S., S.S.,
    M.T. and Y.U. conducted FACE experiments and supplied grain for
    analysis. N.M.H. and P.H. assisted with elements of experimental
    design. K.S. and L.D. assisted with data collection and analysis.
    All authors contributed to manuscript preparation. Author
    Information Reprints and permissions information is available at
    www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial
    interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of
    the paper. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
    addressed to S.S.M. (smyers@hsph.harvard.edu).

LETTER RESEARCH METHODS We examined the response of nutrient levels to
elevated atmospheric [CO2] for the edible portions of rice (Oryza
sativa, 18 cultivars), wheat (Triticum aestivum, 8 cultivars), maize
(Zea mays, 2 cultivars), soybeans (Glycine max, 7 cultivars), field peas
(Pisum sativum, 4 cultivars) and sorghum (Sorghum bicolor, 1 cultivar).
The six crops were grown under FACE conditions; in all six experiments,
the elevated [CO2] was in the range 546--586 p.p.m. (see the
Agricultural Methods section below for details associated with
individual trials). Statistics. In accordance with methods described
previously14,15, the natural logarithm of the response ratio (r 5
response in elevated [CO2]/response in ambient [CO2]) was used as the
metric for analyses and is reported as the mean percentage change (100 3
(r 2 1)) at elevated [CO2]. Consistent with these earlier analyses of
multiple species grown under FACE conditions, the responses of different
species, cultivars and stress treatments and from different years of the
FACE experiments were considered to be independent and suited to
meta-analytic analysis14. The meta-analysis was designed to estimate the
overall effect of elevated [CO2] on the concentration of each nutrient
in a particular crop and to determine the significance of this effect
relative to a null hypothesis of no change. All tests were conducted as
two-sided---not specifying which direction the nutrient concentrations
were expected to change under elevated [CO2]---to make the analysis as
general as possible. Meta-analysis was conducted with a linear mixed
model. A random intercept was included for each comparison, representing
nutrient level variability unrelated to [CO2] that was common to both
treatment groups. Additional analyses indicated that the effect of [CO2]
on zinc concentration in rice was modified by cultivar and amount of
nitrogen application, suggesting systematic variations across the pooled
analysis of rice, and for these samples it was shown that the effect on
zinc concentration was still significant when including interactions
terms for cultivar and nitrogen. No other significant modifications of
the [CO2] effect were identified. We tested whether changes in different
nutrients for particular crops were statistically different from each
other, as has been described30. To address the issue of multiple
comparisons when testing for differences between cultivars within a
crop, we multiplied the P value by the number of independent
comparisons. This approach follows the so-called Bonferroni correction
and is conservative in the sense of biasing the P values high, but it is
nonetheless sufficient in our case to show that individual test results
are significant despite their having been selected from multiple tests.
Parameter estimates were obtained by the restricted maximum-likelihood
method, a standard approach for analysing repeated measurement data29
that, in our case, were of nutrient concentrations at time of harvest.
Results for all analyses are reported as the best estimate of percentage
changes in the concentration of nutrients along with the 95% confidence
intervals associated with each estimate. Twotailed P values are also
reported. When combining our data with previously published data, we
defined outliers as pairs in which the difference between an observation
at ambient [CO2] and elevated [CO2] was at least three times the
standard deviation from the mean differences for that crop and nutrient
type when calculated using all observations. Using this criterion, we
excluded a total of two pairs of previously published data; these
included one observation of iron in rice and one observation of zinc in
potato. These pairs were then excluded from all analyses. Agricultural
methods. Rice (Oryza sativa, 18 cultivars), wheat (Triticum aestivum, 8
cultivars), maize (Zea mays, 2 cultivars), soybeans (Glycine max, 7
cultivars), field peas (Pisum sativum, 4 cultivars) and sorghum (Sorghum
bicolor, 1 cultivar) were grown under FACE conditions during daylight
hours. The experiments were conducted in Australia, Japan and the United
States between 1998 and 2010. Ambient [CO2] ranges were between 363 and
386 p.p.m.; elevated [CO2] was between 546 and 584 p.p.m. With the
exception of soybeans, each experiment involveed multiple cultivars of
each crop and more than one set of growing conditions. Each experiment
for each cultivar and set of treatments was replicated four times, with
the exception of one of the rice sites, for which three replicates were
performed. These data are summarized in Table 1, and additional details
of the soil

and growing conditions, FACE methods and experimental designs have been
published for rice31, wheat32, maize33, soybeans34, field peas32 and
sorghum35. Minerals method. Samples were analysed for minerals by heated
closed-vessel digestion/dissolution with nitric acid and hydrogen
peroxide followed by quantification with an inductively coupled plasma
atomic emission spectrometer36. Nitrogen content was measured by flash
combustion of the sample coupled with thermal conductivity/infrared
detection of the combustion gases (N2, NOx and CO2) with a LECO TruSpec
CN Analyzer37. Protein values are based on measurement of nitrogen and
conversion to protein with the equation below, where k 5 5.36 (ref. 38):

protein (weight %) 5 k 3 nitrogen (weight %) For phytic acid
determination, a modified version of the method of ref. 39 was used. The
accuracy of the method was monitored by the inclusion of tissue
standards of known and varying levels of phytic acid40. Dietary
calculations. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
(UNFAO) publishes annual Food Balance Sheets, which provide
country-specific data on the quantities of 95 ‘standardized' food
commodities available for human consumption. Data, expressed in terms of
dietary energy (kilocalories per person per day) were downloaded for 210
countries and territories with available information for the period
2003--2007 (available at http://faostat.fao.org). The percentage of
dietary energy available from C3 grasses (wheat, barley, rye, oats, rice
and ‘cereals, other' (excluding Eragrostis tef)) was calculated globally
with estimates weighted by national population size (188 countries
available; UN 2011; 2012 revision available at http://esa.un.org/wpp/).
Dietary intake data from the UNFAO Food Balance Sheets (to year 2000)
and food composition data from the United States Department of
Agriculture National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference were used
to calculate per-person nutrient intake for 95 food items; these were
shared with us with permission41. This data set was used to calculate
the contribution of each food item to total dietary zinc and iron
intake, and the proportions of all food items derived from C3 grains and
legumes were summed to identify countries that are highly dependent on
plant sources of iron and zinc (Extended Data Table 5). 30. Schenker, N.
& Gentleman, J. F. On judging the significance of differences by
examining the overlap between confidence intervals. Am. Stat. 55,
182--186 (2001). 31. Hasegawa, T. A. et al. Rice cultivar responses to
elevated CO2 at two free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE) sites in Japan.
Funct. Plant Biol. 40, 148--159 (2013). 32. Mollah, M., Norton, R. &
Huzzey, J. Australian Grains Free Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment (AGFACE)
facility: design and performance. Crop Pasture Sci. 60, 697--707 (2009).
33. Markelz, R., Strellner, R. & Leakey, A. Impairment of C4
photosynthesis by drought is exacerbated by limiting nitrogen and
ameliorated by elevated CO2 in maize. J. Exp. Bot. 62, 3235--3246
(2011). 34. Gillespie, K. et al. Greater antioxidant and respiratory
metabolism in field-grown soybean exposed to elevated O3 under both
ambient and elevated CO2. Plant Cell Environ. 35, 169--184 (2012). 35.
Ottman, M. J. et al. Elevated CO2 increases sorghum biomass under
drought conditions. New Phytol. 150, 261--273 (2001). 36. Sah, R. N. &
Miller, R. O. Spontaneous reaction for acid dissolution of biological
tissues in closed vessels. Anal. Chem. 64, 230--233 (1992). 37. AOAC
Official Method 972.43. in Official Methods of Analysis of AOAC
International, 18th edition, Revision 1, 2006 Ch. 12 5--6 (AOAC
International, 2006). 38. Mosse, J. Nitrogen to protein conversion
factor for ten cereals and six legumes or oilseeds. A reappraisal of its
definition and determination. Variation according to species and to seed
protein content. J. Agric. Food Chem. 38, 18--24 (1990). 39. Haug, W. &
Lantzsch, H. J. Sensitive method for the rapid determination of phytate
in cereals and cereal products. J. Sci. Food Agric. 34, 1423--1426
(1983). 40. Raboy, V. et al. Origin and seed phenotype of maize low
phytic acid 1-1 and low phytic acid 2-1. Plant Physiol. 124, 355--368
(2000). 41. Wuehler, S. E., Peerson, J. M. & Brown, K. H. Use of
national food balance data to estimate the adequacy of zinc in national
food supplies: methodology and regional estimates. Public Health Nutr.
8, 812--819 (2005).

RESEARCH LETTER Extended Data Table 1 | Percentage change in nutrient
content at elevated [CO2] relative to ambient [CO2]

-  ‘Number of pairs' refers to the number of comparisons in which
   replicates of a particular cultivar grown at a specific site under
   one set of growing conditions in one year at elevated [CO2] have been
   pooled and mean nutrient values for these replicates were compared
   with mean values for identical cultivars under identical growing
   conditions except grown at ambient [CO2]. In most instances, data
   from four replicates were pooled for each value, meaning that eight
   experiments were combined for each comparison (see Table 1 for
   details of experiments).

Nature nature13179.3d 21/3/14 13:30:49

LETTER RESEARCH Extended Data Table 2 | Original data combined with
previously published FACE data from studies 3, 4, 6 and 7

See Extended Data Table 6 for a list of experiments. Percentage change
in nutrient content at elevated [CO2] relative to ambient [CO2]. *
‘Number of pairs' refers to the number of comparisons in which
replicates of a particular cultivar grown at a specific site under one
set of growing conditions in one year at elevated [CO2] have been pooled
and mean nutrient values for these replicates were compared with mean
values for identical cultivars under identical growing conditions except
grown at ambient [CO2]. In most instances, data from four replicates
were pooled for each value, meaning that eight experiments were combined
for each comparison (see Table 1 for details of experiments).

RESEARCH LETTER Extended Data Table 3 | Original data combined with
previously published FACE and chamber data from studies 1--10

See Extended Data Table 6 for a list of experiments. Percentage change
in nutrient content at elevated [CO2] relative to ambient [CO2]. *
‘Number of pairs' refers to the number of comparisons in which
replicates of a particular cultivar grown at a specific site under one
set of growing conditions in one year at elevated [CO2] have been pooled
and mean nutrient values for these replicates were compared with mean
values for identical cultivars under identical growing conditions except
grown at ambient [CO2]. In most instances, data from four replicates
were pooled for each value, meaning that eight experiments were combined
for each comparison (see Table 1 for details of experiments).

Nature nature13179.3d 21/3/14 13:30:49

LETTER RESEARCH Extended Data Table 4 | Percentage change in nutrient
content at elevated [CO2] compared with ambient [CO2] for all nutrients

Sample sizes for each crop type are identical to those listed in Table
1.

RESEARCH LETTER Extended Data Table 5 | Countries whose populations
receive at least 60% of dietary iron and/or zinc from C3 grains and
legumes

Source: United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization food balance
sheets and 2010 United Nations estimated population.

Nature nature13179.3d 21/3/14 13:30:49

LETTER RESEARCH Extended Data Table 6 | Literature reporting nutrient
changes in the edible portion of crops grown at elevated and ambient
[CO2]

RESEARCH LETTER

Author Queries Journal: Nature Paper: nature13179 Title: Rising
concentration of atmospheric CO2 threatens human nutrition

Query Reference

Query

1

AUTHOR: Please check that the display items are as follows
(doi:10.1038/nature13179): Figs 1, 2a--c (black & white); Tables: 1;
Boxes: None; Extended Data display items: 6. Please check both figures
and the table very carefully as they have been relabelled, resized and
adjusted to Nature's style. Please ensure that all error bars in the
figures are defined in the figure legends.

Web summary

The largest assemblage so far of published data shows that C3 crops have
decreased zinc and iron levels under CO2 conditions predicted for the
middle of this century, with worldwide nutritional implications.

For Nature office use only: Layout DOI Title Authors Addresses First
para

% % % % % %

Nature nature13179.3d 21/3/14 13:30:50

Figures/Tables/Boxes Error bars Colour Text Methods Received/Accepted
AOP Extended Data

% % % % % % % %

References Supp info Acknowledgements Author contribs COI Correspondence
Author corrx Web summary Accession codes link

% % % % % % % % %


