Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Atmospheric Environment journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/atmosenv

Estimating spatio-temporal resolved PM10 aerosol mass concentrations
using MODIS satellite data and land use regression over Lombardy, Italy
Francesco Nordio a, *, Itai Kloog a, Brent A. Coull b, Alexandra
Chudnovsky a, Paolo Grillo c, Pier Alberto Bertazzi c, Andrea A.
Baccarelli a, Joel Schwartz a a

Department of Environmental Health e Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Landmark Center 401 Park Dr
West, Boston, MA 02215, USA Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School
of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA c Epidemiology Unit, Department of
Preventive Medicine, IRCCS Ca' Granda Foundation, Maggiore Policlinico
Hospital, Milan, Italy b

h i g h l i g h t s  We show PM10 can be reliably predicted in areas
with complex geographic and weather patterns.  We found high
out-of-sample R2 (R2 ¼ 0.787, year to year variation 0.738e0.818).  For
days without AOD values, we also found high R2 (R2 ¼ 0.787, year to year
variation 0.736e0.841).  Importantly, these R2 are for daily, rather
than monthly or yearly, values.  We estimated local, trafﬁc related
pollution allowing to be used in an epidemiological study.

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history: Received 30 July 2012 Received in revised form 14
January 2013 Accepted 21 March 2013

Traditional air pollution epidemiology studies being conducted in large
cities can be limited by the availability of monitoring. Satellite
Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) measurements offer the possibility of
exposure estimates for the entire population. We previously demonstrated
that daily calibration substantially increased the predictive power of
satellite AOD measurements for ﬁne particles (PM2.5) in New England,
allowing estimation of exposure in locations without monitors. Similar
results have not been reported for larger particles (PM10), which are
often the only measures that can be used in locations worldwide that do
not have comprehensive PM2.5 monitoring; this also applies to PM
estimation of historical exposures. Here we extend this methodology by
applying it to 2000e2009 PM10 data from Lombardy, Northern Italy a
region with high altitude differences, frequent temperature inversions
and stationary fronts. Speciﬁcally, by 1) incorporating a model for
missing AOD data to deal with nonrandomness in the missing data; and 2)
modeling interactions between land use and meteorological parameters to
better capture spaceetime interactions. We calibrated AOD data through
mixed-effect models regressing PM10 measurements using day-speciﬁc
random intercepts, and ﬁxed and random AOD and temperature slopes. We
used inverse-probability weighting to account for nonrandom AOD
missingness, while reducing the dimensionality of spatial and temporal
predictors and avoiding selecting different predictors in different
locations, as common in land-use regression. We take advantage of
associations of grid-cell AOD values with PM10 monitoring located
elsewhere and with AOD values in neighboring grid cells to develop
grid-cell predictions when AOD is missing. By using ten-fold
crossvalidation to test the accuracy of our predictions, we found high
out-of-sample R2 (R2 ¼ 0.787, year to year variation 0.738e0.818) for
days with available AOD data. Even in days with no available AOD, our
model performance was comparable (R2 ¼ 0.787, year to year variation
0.736e0.841). Our results demonstrate that PM10 can be reliably
predicted using this AOD-based prediction model, even in a geographical
area with complex geographic and weather patterns. Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

Keywords: Air pollution Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) Epidemiology PM10
Exposure error

-  Corresponding author. Department of Environmental Health e Exposure,
   Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard School of Public Health, 401
   Park Drive, Landmark Center West Room 412-J, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
   Tel.: þ1 781 530 0662. E-mail address: fnordio@hsph.harvard.edu (F.
   Nordio). 1352-2310/$ e see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All
   rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2013.03.043

228

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

1. Introduction A substantial epidemiologic literature has demonstrated
   that exposure to ambient particulate matter (PM) is associated with
   increased morbidity and mortality, particularly associated with
   cardiopulmonary disease (Baccarelli et al., 2008; Brook et al., 2004;
   Lepeule et al., 2012; Miller et al., 2007), and lung cancer (Lepeule
   et al., 2012; Pope III et al., 2002). A recent study in Lombardy,
   Northern Italy showed that annual average PM10 levels exceeded the
   World Health Organization threshold of 20 mg m3 and the European
   Union limit of 40 mg m3, resulting in an increased mortality rate
   (Baccini et al., 2011). In recent years, several methods have been
   presented to assess spatial and temporal variability of the
   concentration of ambient ﬁne particulate matter over a speciﬁc region
   of interest. Many of these methods have the potential to generate
   much more accurate estimates of individual exposures compared to
   using measurements from PM monitoring stations, which are not
   necessarily representative of regional concentrations and
   spatiotemporal patterns. Although geospatial models allow researchers
   to obtain a higher spatial resolution, they are often not sufﬁciently
   validated and have been shown to be affected by a nonnegligible
   measurement error (Paciorek and Liu, 2009). Furthermore, the
   computational time for the development of these methodologies,
   coupled with a lack of consistent monitoring in several countries
   worldwide, precludes the estimation of exposure over long periods of
   time. To reduce computational load, data are often processed as
   monthly or yearly averages, thus discounting day-to-day variation and
   limiting the possibility to study acute effects. A popular method to
   assess long-term exposure is Land Use Regression, which uses spatial
   patterns of land use, such as population density, distance to roads,
   etc. to predict PM measurements at monitoring stations and apply the
   predictions elsewhere. This approach gained considerable interest and
   has been utilized to characterize air pollution exposure and health
   effects for individuals residing within urban areas (Brauer et al.,
   2003; David et al., 1997; Ross et al., 2005). In a recent review,
   Ryan and LeMasters reported that the R2 for published LUR models
   range from 0.54 to 0.81. Because the R2 reported was within the
   dataset used to estimate the model, one would expect the out of
   sample R2 to be lower. The out of sample R2 is the appropriate
   comparison when one is using the model to estimate exposure at
   locations without monitoring data. The authors reported that number
   of monitors generating the exposure estimates were not correlated
   with the model R2, suggesting that the locations of the monitors may
   be of greater importance than the total number of monitors (Ryan and
   LeMasters, 2007). However, because monitors are generally located in
   or near cities, the accuracy of model predictions in less densely
   populated areas may be less, and may show greater dependency on the
   number of monitors. Importantly, PM2.5 monitoring is still limited in
   Europe and PM10 is the standard measure of particles in many
   locations in Europe and worldwide. An alternative approach to LUR
   modeling is the use of satellite observations, which provide radiance
   measurements and retrieve for aerosol properties worldwide for
   cloud-free conditions. The MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging
   Spectroradiometer) instrument onboard the National Aeronautics and
   Space Administration's (NASA) Terra satellite has provided global
   observations of Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD), a measure of light
   extinction by aerosol in the atmospheric column above the earth's
   surface. Terra's sunsynchronous orbit encircles the earth
   approximately 15 times each day, with each pass crossing the equator
   at approximately 10:30 h local solar time. AOD observations from
   Terra provide daily insight into the global distribution of
   column-integrated aerosol

(Hoff and Christopher, 2009). However, the AOD retrieval accuracy
depends on several factors, including the vertical structure,
composition, size distribution, and water content of atmospheric aerosol
and these factors change over space and time (Levy et al., 2007; Remer
et al., 2005). Furthermore, applying this technology to air quality
monitoring and health effects studies requires AOD to be converted to PM
concentrations. The simple linear relationship between AOD and PM,
although strong in certain geographical areas and under speciﬁc climatic
conditions, is not sufﬁcient to predict the levels of PM at each
location with reasonable accuracy. Studies conducted in Europe have
conﬁrmed that AOD could be a proxy for pollution monitoring: Koelmeijer
et al. reported just a weak spatial correlation of 0.6 e equivalent to
an R2 of 0.36 e between yearly average PM10 and AOD for rural background
stations across Europe (Koelemeijer et al., 2006) after controlling for
meteorological factors such as mixing layer and relative humidity. Dinoi
et al., 2010 assessed the regression relationship between daily averaged
PM10 mass concentrations and MODIS-derived AOD, and found much lower
linear correlation coefﬁcients, varying between 0.20 and 0.35, over
Southeastern Italy, in the central Mediterranean area (Dinoi et al.,
2010). Using a new ﬁltering condition and linear regression approach,
Luminita et al. (Filip and Stefan, 2011) have shown a signiﬁcant
correlation coefﬁcient around 0.70 for two neighboring areas in
Bucharest city and a station located in Leicester, UK. Emili et al. also
presented results of satellite-derived PM10 predicted under the
assumption that aerosols are vertically homogeneously distributed below
the planetary Boundary Layer Height (BLH) in Europe highlighting a
serious limitation to the applicability of satellites for ground PM
mapping, especially in mountainous areas. Speciﬁcally, Emili et al.
showed that day-to-day variations in BLH are likely to affect the
accuracy of the predictions for ground level particles (Emili et al.,
2010). Recently, Lee et al. assessed PM2.5 using satellite data with
dayspeciﬁc calibration (Lee et al., 2011), and reported much stronger
associations. Kloog et al. (2011) expanded the day-speciﬁc calibration
approach and presented a novel model for predicting daily PM2.5 between
2000 and 2008 at 10  10 km resolution and at local addresses (100 m)
for the New England region, United States. For days with available AOD
data, mean out-of-sample R2 was equal to 0.830 with this model. For days
without AOD values, the model performance was also excellent (mean
out-of-sample R2 ¼ 0.810). These R2, which are out-of-sample and not
model R2, were generally higher than those from models using LUR alone.
Importantly, the model by Kloog et al. allows prediction of exposures on
shorter timescales (e.g., daily) which may be relevant studies of acute
PM effects. Because larger particles scatter light less efﬁciently than
smaller particles, whether PM10 can be predicted using satellite AOD
data is undetermined. Also, it is unclear how well the approach of Kloog
et al. may perform in regions with greater morphological diversity. We
have applied this modeling structure to construct a hybrid model to
estimate PM10 concentration of the Lombardy region in Italy, a territory
with morphological and weather characteristics that are different from
New England. All previous studies looking at predicating PM10 using
MODIS AOD satellite data lacked high resolution spatial and temporal
predictions. The aim of this study was to predict PM10 over a complex
topographic terrain. By further developing the approach described in
Kloog et al. (2011), we generated daily prediction across large scale
areas at high resolution across the entire Lombardy region, Italy for
the years 2000e2009. We built a three-stage modeling approach to obtain
daily PM10 prediction at 10  10 km resolution, with an additional
fourth stage estimating PM10 at the address level.

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

2. Material and methods 2.1. Study domain Lombardy, an administrative
   region in Northern Italy, with 9,973,386 inhabitants distributed
   across 12 provinces and 1546 municipalities, is the most populous
   region of Italy; its capital is the city of Milan. The Lombardy
   territory is divided almost equally into plain (about 47% of the
   territory) and mountainous areas (40.6% of the territory). Located in
   the Alps, the Pizzo Bernina, at 4049 m above sea level, is the
   highest elevation in the Lombardy region. The remaining 12.4% of the
   region is hilly. The geography of the region is divided into four
   parts extending across the entire region from East to West: 1) a
   Northern alpine territory; 2) a pre-alpine territory of lower
   altitude descending southwards from the Alps; 3) the Po River Valley,
   a large ﬂat area further sub-divided into high and low plains; and 4)
   the area south of the Po River that progressively increases in
   altitude to reach the Apennine mountains south of the Lombardy
   regional boundaries. The Po basin is enclosed by mountains on three
   sides, resulting in weather conditions characterized by stagnation
   that are unfavorable to air quality. The mean wind velocity is among
   the lowest in Europe (ARPA, 2012). The Alps restrict entry of air
   currents associated disturbances into the plains; frequently e more
   often in the winter months e air currents are established under high
   pressure, causing long periods of temperature inversion that trap
   pollutants only a few meters in height above the ground. Because of
   air trapping, the proportion of inorganic and organic particulate of
   secondary origin (which requires time to be formed into the
   atmosphere) exceeds 50% of the overall mass in the Po Valley, which
   is the most populated part of the region. 2.2. AOD data The Moderate
   Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) contains 36 spectral
   bands between 0.41 and 14 mm. The MODIS sensors are located on polar
   orbiting Terra and sun-synchronous Aqua satellites. The Terra
   satellite crosses Europe at around 10:30 local solar time (morning
   orbit) while Aqua crosses Europe at around 13:30 local solar time
   (afternoon orbit). MODIS AOD Collection 5 (Levy et al., 2007)
   overland retrievals use four channels centered at 0.47, 0.66, 1.24
   and 2.1 mm with a nominal resolution of 500 or 250 m at nadir. Over
   land the infrared channels (1.24, 2.1 mm) are used to estimate the
   surface reﬂectance at visible wavelengths via a linear regression
   model. To enhance the accuracy and reduce noise, the AOD at 0.55 mm
   is calculated in grids of 10  10 km, averaging the 20 to 50
   percentile of surface reﬂectance in each grid prior to the inversion.
   Daily data are freely available online through the NASA website.
   Daily MODIS level 2 ﬁles from the Terra satellite for the years
   2000e2009 were used to prepare the analysis presented in this paper.
   For West Europe, AERONET sites show good correspondence with
   MODIS-retrieved AOD (Hyer et al., 2011). Negative AOD values, caused
   by errors in surface reﬂectivity estimation, up to 0.10 were
   included because they provide useful information on low AOD
   situations (Levy et al., 2007). We used in this work only AOD data
   ﬂagged as “Very Good” (ﬂag ¼ 3), which according to the Data Quality
   Statement for the MODIS Collection 5 Aerosol product, are the only
   type of data amenable to use in scientiﬁc analysis (Remer et al.,
   2006). Because MODIS AOD pixel centroids shift slightly from day to
   day between orbits, we created a ﬁxed 10  10 km grid. Daily values
   of AOD were assigned to the grid cell where the AOD reading
   presented. Aqua satellite readings were not used due to missing data
   for the years 2000e2002. Although there are other satellites that
   measure AOD, the MODIS satellite was used for the purposes of this
   study because it is the most validated (using AERONET), accessible,
   and accurate dataset available today

229

(Remer et al., 2005) and/or resulting from elevated aerosol particle
concentrations in the vicinity of clouds (Koren et al., 2007) or
pollution transport at high altitudes (Hoff and Christopher, 2009). 2.3.
Spatial predictor of PM10 2.3.1. Percent of open space Percent of open
space data were obtained through the Corine Land Cover (CLC) project
(Bossard et al., 2000). This project provides consistent localized
geographical information on the land cover of the 12 Member States of
the European Community. CLC is a map of the European environmental
landscape based on interpretation of satellite images. It provides
comparable digital maps of land cover for each country for large parts
of Europe. The spatial resolution is 200  200 m. 2.3.2. Elevation
Elevation data were obtained from ESRI Data & Maps (ESRI, 2012). These
data include global imagery captured at 150-m resolution as well as
shaded relief derived from the SRTM global digital elevation model
(Rabus et al., 2003). 2.3.3. Major roads Road data were obtained from
the geoportal of the Lombardy Region e We calculated primary and
secondary road lengths. The roads were intersected with the 10  10 grid
cell and the resulting attribute tables contained the sum all roads
segment lengths in the 10 km grid. 2.3.4. Population density Population
density was obtained from the European Environment Agency (EEA, 2012).
Data are available at 100 m resolution based on the 2001 Census provided
by Eurostat. The data included the commune boundaries and geographic
boundaries of the communes of the SABE GIS layer, CORINE Land Cover
(CLC-2000), version 9. 2.3.5. Area-source PM10 emission Area-source PM10
was obtained from the INEMAR Project (INEMAR, 2012) (Air Emissions
Inventory), a database designed to estimate emissions at the municipal
level for SNAP (Selected Nomenclature for sources of Air Pollution)
polluting activities and type of fuel. The system collects the variables
used to estimate emissions, such as activity indicators, emission
factors and other statistical data which serve to break down spatial and
temporal emissions. INEMAR also contains the values of estimated
emissions, procedures, and algorithms used to estimate emissions
according to different methodologies. The system (currently at version
6.0), is based on 17 calculation modules, each performing the estimation
of a different type of emission, such as fugitive emissions, both
punctual and trafﬁc. 2.3.6. Meteorological data The meteorological
variables are major determinants of PM levels as they determine the
speed at which pollutants are transported and dispersed in the
atmosphere. We obtained temperature, wind speed, relative humidity,
visibility and sea level pressure from “Servizio Metereologico Regionale
e ARPA Lombardia”. Only continuous operating stations with daily data
running from 2000 to 2009 were used. Grid cells were matched to the
closest weather station. 2.4. Statistical methods We designed the model
to provide predictions both for population health data collected at the
level of (1) small area (census

230

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

areas, postal code areas etc.) geocoded units (SAGD) and (2)
residence-speciﬁc latitude and longitude geocoded data (RGD). For SAGD
data, we generate a base-grid cell model with 10  10 km resolution. For
RGD data, to improve local predictions, we incorporate local land use
variables. The prediction process consists of four stages. Stage 1 model
calibrates the AOD grid-level observations to the PM10 monitoring data
collected within 10 km of an AOD reading. In stage 2, we predict PM10
concentrations in grid cells without monitors but with available AOD
measurements using the stage 1 ﬁt. In stage 3, we estimate PM10
concentrations in cells where no AOD data is missing by building a model
that takes advantage of the association of grid-cell AOD values with
PM10 monitoring located in the speciﬁc region it falls into, and the
association with available AOD values in neighboring grid cells.
Finally, to calculate the local PM10 concentrations in studies using
RGD, we take the residuals of the stage 3 model in each monitoring site
and regress them against local (50 m buffer) LU terms at each monitor.
The base model (stage 1) consists of a mixed model for observed PM10
monitoring data that contains both ﬁxed and day-speciﬁc random effects
for the intercept, AOD slopes, and temperature slopes. This stage 1
model was ﬁt to data from each year (2000e 2009) separately. The model
has several additional features. First, a moderately large number of
additional spatial, temporal (daily), and spatio-temporal predictors are
included as predictors in the PM10 model. However, because use of many
predictors can lead to overﬁtting and lack of precision of the resulting
estimates, we allow the effect of each variable to be unique but shrink
groups of these predictors back to a common mean, which represents a
form of regularization, or penalization, of the resulting coefﬁcients
that can stabilize estimation and avoid overﬁtting. We grouped these
coefﬁcients into the spatial terms, the temporal terms, and the
spatiotemporal terms, and shrink each set of coefﬁcients back towards a
mean for each of these three groups of variables. Second, to accommodate
the fact that daily AOD data missingness is not random, these ﬁrst stage
model incorporated inverse probability weighting (IPW) to potentially
avoid bias in the regression coefﬁcient estimates and thus in the
resulting predictions. This approach effectively up-weights dates which
are under-represented due to a large degree of missing data due to cloud
coverage, snow etc. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst stage of the model can be
written as:

      PMij ¼ a þ uj þ b1 þ vj AODij þ b2 þ kj Temperatureij X4 X3
X12 g X þ m¼1 g2m X2mj þ m g3m X3mij þ εij þ m¼1 1m 1mi h Xi   uj vj
kj wN ð000Þ; i h   g11 ; .g1;4 wN g1 ; s21 i h   g21 ; .g2;3 wN g2 ;
s22 h i   g31 ; .g3;12 wN g3 ; s23 where PMij is the measured PM10
concentration at a spatial site i on a day j; a and uj are the ﬁxed and
random (day speciﬁc) intercepts, respectively, AODij is the AOD value in
the grid cell corresponding to site i on a day j; b1 and vj are the ﬁxed
and random slopes, respectively. Temperatureij is the temperature value
in the grid the cell corresponding to site i on a day j (b2 and kj are
the ﬁxed and random slopes for temperature). X1mi is the value of the
mth spatial predictor at site j, X2mj is the value of the mth temporal
predictor on day j, and X3mij is the value of the mth spatial-temporal
predictor at site i on day j. Here, we assume sis a 3  3 diagonal
matrix with diagonal elements s2u , s2v , s2k . To obtain the weights
that account for

the non-random missingness in AOD values, we ﬁt the following model for
the probability (p) of observing a given AOD value:

  b p ¼ b0 þ b1 Elevation þ b2 SLP þ b3 Temperature ln 1b p þ Month;
where (p) is the probability for availability of AOD in each day in each
grid cell in each year and SLP is sea level pressure. We then use the
inverse probability weights in the above mixed model.

IPW ¼

  1 b p

To validate this ﬁrst stage of the model, the dataset was repeatedly
randomly divided into 90% and 10% splits. Outliers were excluded from
regression analysis by dropping observations with studentized residuals
that exceeded þ3 or 3 (Fox, 2008). Predictions for the held-out 10% of
the data were made from the model ﬁt of the remaining 90% of the data.
This “out-of-sample” process was repeated ten times and cross-validated
(CV) R2 values were computed. To check for bias we regressed the
measured PM10 values in the held out data against the predicted values
in each site on each day. Overall temporal R2 and overall spatial R2
were calculated as well. The second stage uses the ﬁt from the stage 1
model to predict a PM10 concentration for each day and grid at which we
have an observed AOD value. In stage 3, we estimated daily PM10
concentration levels for all grid cells in the study domain for days
when AOD data were unavailable by using the stage 2 data. Speciﬁcally,
we regress the PM10 predictions obtained in stage 2 on the daily mean
measured PM10, and a nonparametric spatial term that is a smooth
nonparametric function of longitude and latitude. This stage ﬁts the
following semiparametric regression model:

    PredPMij ¼ a þ uj þ b1 þ vj MPMj þ SmoothðX; YÞkðjÞ þ 3 ij ; i h
  uj vj w ð0 0Þ; Ub where PredPMij is the predicted PM10 concentration
at a spatial site i on a day j from the 2nd stage model; MPMj is the
mean PM across the Lombardy region on a day j; a and ui are the ﬁxed and
random intercepts, respectively; b1 and vi are the ﬁxed and random
slopes, respectively. The smooth (X,Y) is a thin plate spline ﬁt to the
latitude and longitude, k(j) denotes the two-month period in which day j
falls (that is, a separate spatial smooth was ﬁt for each two-month
period). Using this ﬁnal model, we again performed crossvalidation ten
times to estimate the predictive ability of the model. To provide better
estimates in cases in which health outcomes are resolved to the speciﬁc
longitude and latitude for a given study subject residence, we ﬁt a
local PM stage (stage 4) that takes the residuals constructed by taking
the difference between a given monitored PM10 concentration and the 10
km  10 km grid prediction from stage 3 for the grid in which that
monitor is located, and regresses these residuals on location-speciﬁc
predictors of pollution. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁt the following model:

ResidPMij ¼ f1 ðTraffic Densityi ; Population Densityi Þ þ f2
ðElevationi Þ þ f3 ðPercent Urbani Þ þ f4 ðDistance to Major roadsi Þ þ
3 ij where ResidPMij is the residual at a spatial monitor site i on day
j; f1 denotes a penalized spline for an interaction between trafﬁc
density and population density; f2ef4 denote (potentially nonlinear)
effects of elevation, percent urban and distance to major road,

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

respectively, on these residuals, and 3 ij is the error. In contrast to
stage 1, where land use terms were grid cell averages, for this model
land use terms were all computed for a 50 m radius about the monitor, to
capture local effects. 3. Results Fig. 1A shows the relationship between
MOD04 AOD values and the corresponding PM10 concentrations measured at
the monitoring stations during 2008. As shown in Fig. 1A, the near
surface PM10 concentrations are not well predicted by the total AOD
column values. While in general, low AOD values correspond to low
measured PM10 concentrations at the ground, occasionally low AOD values
correspond to high measures of PM10 concentrations. Furthermore, our
initial data included days with high AOD but relatively low measured
ground concentrations. In most cases these days were characterized by
high residuals in the stage 1 regression. To improve the accuracy of our
prediction model these high residuals (resulted presumably due to lower
AOD retrieval accuracy over bright urban areas, snow condition or
cloud-contamination as well as errors in PM10 measurements) were
excluded from our analyses and the model was re-run. Fig. 1B shows the
signiﬁcant ﬁt improvement gained by calibrating with our stage 1 model.
However, some days were not well explained by the model. The ﬁrst stage
models all had high out-of-sample ﬁts for each year and the entire study
period, with a mean out-of-sample R2 ¼ 0.787 (year to year variation
0.738e0.818), and as expected a highly signiﬁcant association between
PM10 and the main explanatory variable-AOD (Table 1). We found no bias
in our crossvalidation results (slope of observed versus predicted ¼
0.98e1.00). The spatial and temporal out-of-sample results also
presented high ﬁts (Table 1) with low RMSPE values ranging from 3.2 to
5.9 mg m3 across all years. For the temporal model the mean
out-of-sample R2 was 0.788 (year to year variation 0.740e0.827). The
stage 3 models also performed well, as shown in Table 2.

231

As can be seen, models showed a mean out-of-sample R2 of 0.787
(year-to-year variation 0.736e0.841), which is relatively high
considering that these were days with neither ground PM data nor
satellite AOD data in the grid cells being predicted. Fig. 2A and B
compares the model-predicted and the actual measured PM10 from the
monitor stations located in Milano and Tirano, a small city located in
mountain, respectively. As expected, Milano is characterized by much
higher pollution levels than Tirano capturing the high range in PM10
variability. As can be see, the temporal variability pattern of the
predicted by the model concentrations follows the temporal variability
of the measured PM10 concentrations for both urban Milano and sub-urban
mountain Tirano sites. Also the range between the 10th and the 90th
percentiles for both predicted and measured values distributions was
good. Speciﬁcally, in Milan the range varies from 19.00 to 74.00 mg m3
in the measured values vs. 15.74 to 81.54 mg m3 in the predicted
values. In Tirano the variability ranges from 6.00 to 52.00 mg m3 in
the measured values vs. 5.10 to 50.17 mg m3 the in predicted values.
However, in Milan a few days were underestimated in February and
overestimated in May, whereas in Tirano on certain winter days we might
overestimate the PM10 concentrations. This result is not surprising and
might be related to the retrieval AOD accuracy in the mountain region.
Fig. 3 shows the spatial pattern at 10 km  10 km resolution of
predicted PM10 concentration from the AOD models, averaged over the
entire study period. Mean predicted PM10 range from 31.9 mg m3 to 52.2
mg m3. As expected, predicted PM10 concentration are higher in urban
areas such as Milan, Bergamo and Brescia compared to smaller cities
placed in hilly areas such as Varese, Como and Lecco, or in the
mountainous area such as Sondrio. In Fig. 4, we present a ﬁne resolution
map at 200 m  200 m showing the difference of the estimated local
pollution (stage 4) from the average PM10 concentrations at a very ﬁne
resolution aimed to estimate local, trafﬁc related pollution. This was
done by taking our estimates at the 10 km grid level as the local
meso-scale

Fig. 1. Scatter plot of the AOD-PM relationship before and after the
calibration.

232

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

Table 1 Prediction accuracy in stage 1: Ten-fold cross-validated (CV) R2
for yearly PM10 models (2000e2009). Yearly dataset

CV R2

Intercepta

Slopea

CV R2Spatial

CV R2Temporal

RMSPEb

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Mean 2000e2009

0.738 0.784 0.818 0.808 0.806 0.796 0.760 0.768 0.810 0.786 0.787

0.59  0.59 1.13  0.44 0.14  0.46 0.10  0.39 0.94  0.37 0.55  0.33
0.63  0.28 0.11  0.26 0.18  0.22 0.61  0.21

0.99  0.01 0.97  0.01 1.00  0.01 1.00  0.01 0.98  0.01 0.99  0.01
0.98  0.01 1.00  0.01 0.99  0.01 0.98  0.01

0.737 0.852 0.721 0.802 0.822 0.739 0.758 0.833 0.812 0.728 0.780

0.740 0.774 0.827 0.808 0.805 0.802 0.760 0.760 0.811 0.792 0.788

5.886 3.395 4.086 3.632 3.384 3.823 3.501 3.167 3.294 3.299 3.747

a b

Presented as parameter estimate  SE from linear regression of held-out
observations versus predictions. Root of the mean squared prediction
errors.

concentration, and looking at the residuals between that and the actual
measured PM10 at monitoring stations. Those differences are due to very
local emissions, and noise in the data. We model them against land use
terms within 50 m of the monitor to develop a land use regression that
predicts not absolute values, but differences from the grid cell value.
We found no evidence of bias in our modeled PM10. The slope of the
linear regression of measured PM10 (in the held out monitoring data)
with predicted PM10 ranged from 0.98 to 1.00. 4. Discussion Most
particle epidemiology studies in the literature have relied on central
site monitoring to assess exposure to particles. This results in
exposure measurement error, which can lead to biased estimates of the
effects of particles, and hence biased estimates of risk. It also
increases the risk of not ﬁnding a signiﬁcant association. While some
recent studies have used modeled estimates of longterm exposure, such
approaches have been hampered by limited model performance, with poorer
accuracy in regions with fewer monitors. In this paper we examined the
relationship between PM10 ground measurements and MODIS AOD data in
Lombardy during the period 2000e2009. Our model is based on the
methodology recently proposed to estimate the PM2.5 by Kloog et al.
(2011) and previously applied for New England. We presented some key
ﬁndings in our results. First, we had no bias in our cross-validation
results (average slope of 0.99), which is a critical consideration in
producing estimates for risk assessment and epidemiology. In addition,
our model performs quite well with a mean out-ofsample R2 of 0.787 which
is much higher compared to other

Table 2 Prediction accuracy in stage 3: Ten-fold cross-validated (CV) R2
for yearly PM10 models (2000e2009). Yearly dataset

CV R2

CV R2Spatial

CV R2Temporal

RMSPEa

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Mean 2000e2009

0.736 0.790 0.841 0.821 0.806 0.790 0.753 0.753 0.798 0.783 0.787

0.558 0.735 0.790 0.725 0.672 0.633 0.548 0.694 0.673 0.658 0.669

0.805 0.800 0.846 0.831 0.822 0.804 0.780 0.763 0.816 0.798 0.806

7.632 4.538 3.551 4.282 4.596 4.532 4.784 4.288 4.345 3.700 4.625

Presented as parameter estimate  SE from linear regression of held-out
observations versus predictions. a Root of the mean squared prediction
errors.

available PM10 models. For instance Paciorek et al. designed a
sophisticated spatio-temporal model for the Nurses' Health study in the
US (Paciorek et al., 2008) to predict monthly PM10 levels. This model
obtained good accuracy, although its root mean squared prediction error
(RMSPE) was greater than in our prediction model (6.38 mg m3 vs. 4.62
mg m3 in the validation dataset). Another key feature of our model is
our method for estimating local, trafﬁc related pollution. This gives us
an estimated local trafﬁc particle term that is independent of the area
level exposure, allowing both to be used simultaneously in an
epidemiology study. In this study we show that our statistical approach
is suitable to estimate PM10 also in a substantially different region
like Lombardy, characterized by very high mountains and extensive
valleys. Furthermore, the use of covariates constructed as standardized
interactions between spatial and weather variables, and the addition of
IPW weights to take account of the selection bias for days with missing
AOD values signiﬁcantly contribute to the goodness of ﬁt and lack of
bias in our estimates. The weather conditions in the Po Valley,
surrounded from all directions by the Alps and the Apennines, place the
region at disadvantage for air pollution conditions. Lombardy is located
in the central part of the Po Valley, and its climatology is largely
determined by the orography of the area. A vast plain bordered to the
north, west, and south by mountain ranges extending up to high
altitudes, Lombardy's climatological characteristics are determined by
its surroundings. The primary physical characteristics of the region are
the strong continentally of the area, the weak wind regime, and the
persistence of atmospheric stability conditions. The presence of the
Alpine-range barrier decisively inﬂuences the evolution of perturbations
from the Atlantic; this dynamic determines the prevalence of situations
of occlusion, as well as promoting a general decoupling between the
circulations in the lower layers and those of the upper layers. The
central-western Po Valley, especially near the foothills, is affected by
the presence of a particular wind, the foehn, a stream of dry air that
comes down from the mountains. The frequency of this phenomenon is high
in the period between December and May, usually reaching a maximum in
March. All these factors predispose to the accumulation of pollutants,
especially in the winter, but also in the presence of photochemical
phenomena during the summer months. Several methods that use the MODIS
satellite have been proposed for studying air quality in Europe for
short time periods often suffering from either a signiﬁcant bias
(Matthias, 2008) or limited to small regions (Timmermans et al., 2007).
In the QUITSTAT project for air quality monitoring, Nicolantonio et al.
generated daily maps of satellite-based PM2.5 concentrations over
Northern Italy for the years 2004e2008 obtaining moderately good
predictions (Di Nicolantonio and Cacciari, 2011). Comparison with daily
PM2.5 sampled on the ground during the QUITSAT

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

233

Fig. 2. Temporal variation of Measured PM10 and Predicted PM10 in Milan
and Tirano areas.

project over six validation sites in the Po valley, showed moderately
good agreement (in sample R2 ¼ 0.68 and R2 ¼ 0.59 for MODIS/Terra and
MODIS/Aqua, respectively) and slopes demonstrating only modest bias
(slope ¼ 0.85 and slope ¼ 0.77). Our model provides a daily estimate for
10 years of exposure to PM10 with better agreement and no bias, and will
be particularly suitable in conducting epidemiologic studies to evaluate
both longand short-term effects. We plan on carrying out several studies
in the near future making use of our generated predictions for

studies on the health effects of PM10 exposure (such as mortality,
hospital admissions etc.) in the Lombardy Region. Furthermore, the
overall statistical performance of our model was adequate and consistent
with other epidemiological studies that use predictive models to assign
exposure to the study subjects (Puett et al., 2009; Yanosky et al.,
2008). In addition these predictions could be of use in other areas such
as for regulating regional air pollution standards, assessing regional
differences in exposure, looking for socioeconomic gradients, etc.

234

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

Fig. 3. Mean PM10 concentration in each 10  10 km grid during the
entire modeling period (2000e2009) predicted by the AOD models.

Despite the high overall accuracy of our model prediction, we
acknowledge several limitations. The differences between measured and
predicted PM10 can be attributed to errors in PM10 measurements, as well
as random and systematic errors of satellite AOD retrieval. Potential
sources of uncertainty in the AOD retrieval are snow coverage,
unresolved cloud residuals, and other cloudrelated factors such as
remnants of decaying clouds and stray

light from 3-D effect (Levy et al., 2010) that can result in bias in the
retrieved AOD. Although we excluded outliers and allowed slopes and
intercepts to change by day, some inaccuracies undoubtedly remained.
Furthermore, errors in the AOD measurements due to clear and low
pollution days directly propagate into the precision with which PM can
be estimated. In spite of those limitations, our out of sample R2 is
among the highest reported for PM10 models.

Fig. 4. The difference of the estimated local pollution from the average
PM10 concentrations at a very ﬁne resolution (200  200 m) in the
Lombardy region.

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

AOD retrievals could be improved in two main areas. The ﬁrst relates to
spatial resolution of currently existing AOD products, which is too
coarse. Chudnovsky et al. (2013) have recently shown that that a high
spatial resolution is essential to improving PM2.5 e AOD agreement and
to detect spatial variability in aerosol loadings at regional and at a
sub-10 km scale (e.g. intra-urban domain). Future releases of higher
spatial resolution AOD retrievals will test the proposed methodology at
the intra-urban domain. Secondly, improvements can be achieved by
increasing the retrieval accuracy. For example, the upcoming MODIS-Terra
Collection 6 reprocessing will combine the MOD04 dark-target approach
and the Deep Blue AOD retrieval above the bright/snow surfaces (Hsu et
al., 2004). Thus, this release could provide more valid AOD readings
above mountain region during snowing conditions. Although during winter
months we have fewer AOD readings available for mountainous regions, the
stage 3 of the model was able to predict the PM10 levels using regional
monitoring, as well the neighboring cells using spatial smoothing. We
acknowledge a margin of error when collecting data from cells derived
from elevated areas, where the spatial smoothing uses cells at lower
altitudes. However, as shown in Fig. 2, our model performed well even in
locations such as Tirano, which is in the mountainous north. Although
the model is expected to have poorer performance higher up the mountain
slopes, we note that because higher mountains have much lower population
density, estimates in those areas are of limited relevance for
epidemiology studies. Further, the fourth stage of our model partially
solves this limitation by providing a more appropriate estimate of the
residuals of the stage 3 and capturing a local effect using LU
time-invariant variables, including elevation. 5. Conclusion We showed
that AOD can be used to predict PM10 mass concentrations in a complex
terrain such as Lombardy region and provide determination of PM10
spatial and temporal variability. Our model allows for assessing short-
and long-term human exposures that can be used to investigate both acute
and chronic effects of ambient particles. Conﬂict of interest The
authors declare that they have no actual or potential conﬂict of
interest. Acknowledgments This work was supported by INAIL Foundation
and Lombardy Region Research Contracts UniMi 8614/2006 and UniMi
9167/2007. Dr. Baccarelli received support from the NIEHS-HSPH Center
for Environmental Health (ES000002). Dr. Schwartz received support from
EPA RD 83479801 and NIEHS R21 ES020695. The authors want to thank Steven
J. Melly, Harvard School of Public Health, for GIS processing and
Emanuele Emili, Centre Européen de Recherche et de Formation Avancée en
Calcul Scientiﬁque, for his valuable contribution with retrieval
algorithm for aerosol optical depth. We thank Matthew O'Brien for his
help in revising this manuscript. References ARPA, 2012. Agenzia
Regionale per la Protezione dell'Ambiente della Lombardia. Baccarelli,
A., Martinelli, I., Zanobetti, A., Grillo, P., Hou, L.F., Bertazzi,
P.A., Mannucci, P.M., Schwartz, J., 2008. Exposure to particulate air
pollution and risk of deep vein thrombosis. Archives of Internal
Medicine 168, 920. Baccini, M., Biggeri, A., Grillo, P., Consonni, D.,
Bertazzi, P.A., 2011. Health impact assessment of ﬁne particle pollution
at the regional level. American Journal of Epidemiology 174, 1396e1405.

235

Bossard, M., Feranec, J., Otahel, J., Agency, E.E., 2000. CORINE Land
Cover Technical Guide: Addendum 2000. European Environment Agency,
Copenhagen Denmark. Brauer, M., Hoek, G., Van Vliet, P., Meliefste, K.,
Fischer, P., Gehring, U., Heinrich, J., Cyrys, J., Bellander, T., Lewne,
M., 2003. Estimating long-term average particulate air pollution
concentrations: application of trafﬁc indicators and geographic
information systems. Epidemiology 14, 228. Brook, R.D., Franklin, B.,
Cascio, W., Hong, Y., Howard, G., Lipsett, M., Luepker, R., Mittleman,
M., Samet, J., Smith Jr., S.C., 2004. Air pollution and cardiovascular
disease A statement for healthcare professionals from the expert panel
on population and prevention science of the American Heart Association.
Circulation 109, 2655e2671. Chudnovsky, A.A., Kostinski, A., Lyapustin,
A., Koutrakis, P., 2013. Spatial scales of pollution from variable
resolution satellite imaging. Environmental Pollution 172, 131e138.
David, J.B., Collins, S., Elliott, P., Fischer, P., Kingham, S., Lebret,
E., Pryl, K., Van Reeuwijk, H., Smallbone, K., ANDRE, V.A.N.D.E.R.V.,
1997. Mapping urban air pollution using GIS: a regression-based
approach. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 11,
699e718. Di Nicolantonio, W., Cacciari, A., 2011. MODIS multiannual
observations in support of air quality monitoring in Northern Italy.
Italian Journal of Remote Sensing 4, 97e109. Dinoi, A., Perrone, M.R.,
Burlizzi, P., 2010. Application of MODIS products for air quality
studies over Southeastern Italy. Remote Sensing 2, 1767e1796. EEA, 2012.
European Environment Agency Population Data. Emili, E., Popp, C.,
Petitta, M., Rifﬂer, M., Wunderle, S., Zebisch, M., 2010. PM10 remote
sensing from geostationary SEVIRI and polar-orbiting MODIS sensors over
the complex terrain of the European Alpine region. Remote Sensing of
Environment 114, 2485e2499. ESRI, 2012. ArcGIS 9.3, 9.3 ed.
Environmental Systems Research Institute. Filip, L., Stefan, S., 2011.
Study of the correlation between the near-ground PM10 mass concentration
and the aerosol optical depth. Journal of Atmospheric and
Solar-Terrestrial Physics 73, 1883e1889. Fox, J., 2008. Applied
Regression Analysis and Generalized Linear Models. Sage Publications.
Incorporated. Hoff, R.M., Christopher, S.A., 2009. Remote sensing of
particulate pollution from space: have we reached the promised land?
Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 59, 645e675. Hsu,
N.C., Tsay, S.-C., King, M.D., Herman, J.R., 2004. Aerosol properties
over brightreﬂecting source regions. Geoscience and Remote Sensing, IEEE
Transactions on 42, 557e569. Hyer, E., Reid, J., Zhang, J., 2011. An
over-land aerosol optical depth data set for data assimilation by
ﬁltering, correction, and aggregation of MODIS Collection 5 optical
depth retrievals. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques 4, 379e408. INEMAR,
2012. INEMAR (INventario di EMissioni in ARia e Air Emission Inventory)
Database. Kloog, I., Koutrakis, P., Coull, B.A., Lee, H.J., Schwartz,
J., 2011. Assessing temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures
for epidemiological studies using satellite aerosol optical depth
measurements. Atmospheric Environment 45 (35), 6267e6275. Koelemeijer,
R., Homan, C., Matthijsen, J., 2006. Comparison of spatial and temporal
variations of aerosol optical thickness and particulate matter over
Europe. Atmospheric Environment 40, 5304e5315. Koren, I., Remer, L.A.,
Kaufman, Y.J., Rudich, Y., Martins, J.V., 2007. On the twilight zone
between clouds and aerosols. Geophysical Research Letters 34, L08805.
Lee, H.J., Liu, Y., Coull, B., Schwartz, J., Koutrakis, P., 2011. PM2.5
prediction modeling using MODIS AOD and its implications for health
effect studies. Epidemiology 22, S215. Lepeule, J., Laden, F., Dockery,
D., Schwartz, J., 2012. Chronic exposure to ﬁne particles and mortality:
an extended follow-up of the Harvard six cities study from 1974 to 2009.
Environmental Health Perspectives 120 (7), 965e970. Levy, R.C., Remer,
L.A., Mattoo, S., Vermote, E.F., Kaufman, Y.J., 2007. Second-generation
operational algorithm: retrieval of aerosol properties over land from
inversion of Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer spectral
reﬂectance. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres (1984e2012)
112. Levy, R.C., Remer, L.A., Kleidman, R.G., Mattoo, S., Ichoku, C.,
Kahn, R., Eck, T.F., 2010. Global evaluation of the Collection 5 MODIS
dark-target aerosol products over Land. Atmospheric Chemistry and
Physics Discussions 10, 14815e14873. Matthias, V., 2008. The aerosol
distribution in Europe derived with the Community Multiscale Air Quality
(CMAQ) model: comparison to near surface in situ and sunphotometer
measurements. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics Discussions 8,
1457e1503. Miller, K.A., Siscovick, D.S., Sheppard, L., Shepherd, K.,
Sullivan, J.H., Anderson, G.L., Kaufman, J.D., 2007. Long-term exposure
to air pollution and incidence of cardiovascular events in women. New
England Journal of Medicine 356, 447e458. Paciorek, C.J., Liu, Y., 2009.
Limitations of remotely sensed aerosol as a spatial proxy for ﬁne
particulate matter. Environmental Health Perspectives 117, 904.
Paciorek, C.J., Yanosky, J.D., Puett, R.C., Laden, F., Suh, H.H., 2008.
Practical Largescale Spatio-temporal Modeling of Particulate Matter
Concentrations. Harvard University Biostatistics Working Paper Series.
Working Paper 76. http://biostats. bepress.com/harvardbiostat/paper76.
Pope III, C.A., Burnett, R.T., Thun, M.J., Calle, E.E., Krewski, D.,
Ito, K., Thurston, G.D., 2002. Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality,
and long-term exposure to ﬁne

236

F. Nordio et al. / Atmospheric Environment 74 (2013) 227e236

particulate air pollution. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical
Association 287, 1132e1141. Puett, R.C., Hart, J.E., Yanosky, J.D.,
Paciorek, C., Schwartz, J., Suh, H., Speizer, F.E., Laden, F., 2009.
Chronic ﬁne and coarse particulate exposure, mortality, and coronary
heart disease in the Nurses' Health Study. Environmental Health
Perspectives 117, 1702. Rabus, B., Eineder, M., Roth, A., Bamler, R.,
2003. The shuttle radar topography missionda new class of digital
elevation models acquired by spaceborne radar. ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 57, 241e262. Remer, L.A., Kaufman, Y.,
Tanré, D., Mattoo, S., Chu, D., Martins, J.V., Li, R.R., Ichoku, C.,
Levy, R., Kleidman, R., 2005. The MODIS aerosol algorithm, products, and
validation. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 62, 947e973. Remer, L.,
Kaufman, Y., Tanré, D., Matoo, S., Li, R.R., Martins, J.V., Levy, R.,
Chu, D.A., Kleidman, R., Ichoku, C., 2006. Collection 005 Change Summary
for MODIS Aerosol (04\_L2) Algorithms.

Ross, Z., English, P.B., Scalf, R., Gunier, R., Smorodinsky, S., Wall,
S., Jerrett, M., 2005. Nitrogen dioxide prediction in Southern
California using land use regression modeling: potential for
environmental health analyses. Journal of Exposure Science and
Environmental Epidemiology 16, 106e114. Ryan, P.H., LeMasters, G.K.,
2007. A review of land-use regression models for characterizing
intraurban air pollution exposure. Inhalation Toxicology 19, 127e133.
Timmermans, R., Schaap, M., Elbern, H., Apituley, A., Koelemeijer, R.,
Siddans, R., Tjemkes, S., Vautard, R., de Leeuw, G., Builtjes, P., 2007.
The use of satellitebased measurements of AOD for the analysis and
forecasts of PM2.5 concentrations at ground level. Observing
Tropospheric Trace Constituents from Space 192. Yanosky, J.D., Paciorek,
C.J., Schwartz, J., Laden, F., Puett, R., Suh, H.H., 2008.
Spatiotemporal modeling of chronic PM10 exposure for the Nurses' Health
Study. Atmospheric Environment 42, 4047e4062.


