Environment International 81 (2015) 80--86

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Environment International journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/envint

Full length article

Changing patterns of the temperature--mortality association by time and
location in the US, and implications for climate change Francesco Nordio
a,b, Antonella Zanobetti b, Elena Colicino b, Itai Kloog c, Joel
Schwartz b,⁎ a b c

TIMI Study Group, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Department of
Environmental Health, Exposure, Epidemiology, and Risk Program, Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA Department of Geography and
Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer
Sheva, Israel

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history: Received 7 July 2014 Received in revised form 13 April
2015 Accepted 14 April 2015 Available online 25 May 2015 Keywords:
Climate change Health effects Temperature Meta-smoothing

a b s t r a c t The shape of the non-linear relationship between
temperature and mortality varies among cities with different climatic
conditions. There has been little examination of how these curves change
over space and time. We evaluated the short-term effects of hot and cold
temperatures on daily mortality over six 7-year periods in 211 US
cities, comprising over 42 million deaths. Cluster analysis was used to
group the cities according to similar temperatures and relative
humidity. Temperature--mortality functions were calculated using
B-splines to model the heat effect (lag 0) and the cold effect on
mortality (moving average lags 1--5). The functions were then combined
through meta-smoothing and subsequently analyzed by meta-regression. We
identiﬁed eight clusters. At lag 0, Cluster 5 (West Coast) had a RR of
1.14 (95% CI: 1.11,1.17) for temperatures of 27 °C vs 15.6 °C, and
Cluster 6 (Gulf Coast) has a RR of 1.04 (95% CI: 1.03,1.05), suggesting
that people are acclimated to their respective climates. Controlling for
cluster effect in the multivariate-meta regression we found that across
the US, the excess mortality from a 24-h temperature of 27 °C decreased
over time from 10.6% to 0.9%. We found that the overall risk due to the
heat effect is signiﬁcantly affected by summer temperature mean and air
condition usage, which could be a potential predictor in building
climate-change scenarios. © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction The relationship between temperature and non-accidental
   mortality with subsequent identiﬁcation of vulnerable populations at
   risk is currently being investigated by public health specialists
   worldwide (Analitis et al., 2008; Anderson and Bell, 2011; Basu and
   Ostro, 2008; Medina-Ramón and Schwartz, 2007; Zanobetti et al.,
   2012a, 2012b). The nature of this relationship varies depending on
   the geographical location and socio-economic status of affected
   populations (Braga et al., 2001; Hajat and Kosatky, 2010; Yu et al.,
   2010). A key issue is what dose--response curve to use for the acute
   effects of temperature in estimating the potential impacts of climate
   change. Some studies have assumed that the dose--response
   relationship will stay constant over time (Peng et al., 2011;
   Voorhees et al., 2011). However, cross-sectional observations
   contradict this in ﬁnding. In US cities that are currently warmer in
   the summer, higher temperatures are needed to produce the same
   percentage increase in mortality as

⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Environmental Health,
Department of Epidemiology, 665 Huntington Avenue, Landmark Center Room
415, Boston, MA 02115, USA. E-mail address: jschwrtz@hsph.harvard.edu
(J. Schwartz).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2015.04.009 0160-4120/© 2015 Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

occurs at less extreme temperatures in locations with milder climates.
One could alternatively choose to assess the effect of e.g., a 2 °C
increase in mean temperature in one city by using a dose--response curve
from a city that has already attained that temperature. However that
assumes fairly rapid acclimatization to the new temperature régime, and
the cross-sectional data provides no information on how likely that is.
Clearly a more detailed assessment of how dose--response curves vary by
temperature régime and how fast they change is needed to provide
reasonable estimates of future risk. A small number of studies have
addressed this question. For example, in a recent paper, Deschênes and
Greenstone estimated the impacts of climate change on mortality and
expenditures on self-protection or adaptation using economic models.
Their measure of self-protection is energy consumption, which via air
conditioning (AC) is perhaps the primary form of protection against high
temperatures. Their identiﬁcation strategy relied on the presumed random
year-to-year local variation in temperature (Deschênes and Greenstone,
2011), but does not address acute episodes. Using an econometric model,
Barreca et al. found that the mortality effect of an extremely hot day
declined by approximately 80% between 1900--1959 and 1960--2004 in the
United States (Barreca et al., 2013). However, that analysis was
conducted at the state level, and with only monthly mortality
statistics. Cunrui Huang et al. (2011) recently wrote an extensive
review about projecting future heat-related mortality under climate
change scenarios. In their

F. Nordio et al. / Environment International 81 (2015) 80--86

conclusion they identiﬁed that signiﬁcant differences in projected
mortality can be found in different emission scenarios, suggesting that
greenhouse gas mitigation policies are important for protecting human
health. They also acknowledged that further research is needed to
provide a stronger theoretical framework for these types of projections,
including better understanding of socioeconomic development, adaptation
strategies and land-use patterns. The approaches commonly used in
environmental epidemiology to study these effects are cityspeciﬁc time
series or case-crossover analysis (Braga et al., 2001; Curriero et al.,
2002). In these previously published studies, if temperature was
estimated as a linear term both methods produce a parameter that
expresses the logarithm of the incidence rate ratio after control for
confounders, for each city included in the study. Coefﬁcients from
multiple cities can be combined into a single aggregate parameter using
a univariate meta-analysis (Stieb et al., 2002). However, complex
associations including nonlinear J- or U-shaped relationships between
temperature and mortality are usually described with functions deﬁned by
multiple parameters, and thus require more sophisticated metaanalytical
approaches capable of handling the multivariate nature of the summary
estimates. Moreover understanding drivers of change in response over
time and adequate power for meta-regression requires more years of
follow-up and more locations than have generally been reported
(Gasparrini et al., 2012). Åström et al. (2013) recently analyzed the
relationship between extreme hot/cold temperatures and all-cause
mortality, stratiﬁed by decade, sex, and age from 1901 to 2009 in
Sweden. The paper focused exclusively on extreme temperatures.
Speciﬁcally, the authors looked at changes in the effect above 98th
percentile and below the 2nd percentile of temperature over time, and
only in Stockholm. Interestingly, they found that the relative risk of
total daily mortality due to heat extremes in all decades decreased
linearly over time; decline in mortality with cold extremes over time
was not found. Bobb et al. (2014) recently examined heatrelated
mortality and found that the mortality risk decreased over time
supporting the hypothesis that the population is continually adapting to
heat. Also Guo and co-authors in their systematic evaluation recently
reported that people have some ability to adapt to their local climate
type, but both cold and hot temperatures are still associated with
increased risk of mortality (Guo et al., 2014). In this study we examine
the association between temperature and mortality over six 7-year
periods in 211 cities in the United States, focusing particularly on
changes over time, and across cities clustered by common weather
patterns. Our study is not looking at extreme effects, but continuous
effects of temperature, and more cities and for a longer time period
than previous studies in the U.S. We also explore the role of land use,
air conditioning, etc. in predicting these changes. Several approaches
to combining nonlinear curves have been proposed. Schwartz and Zanobetti
proposed a method they called meta-smoothing that combined estimated
effects at a series of exposures across multiple locations (Schwartz and
Zanobetti, 2000). Alternative methods involved combining coefﬁcients at
the knot points of splines, an approach recently updated and implemented
in R through the mvmeta function (Gasparrini et al., 2012). A
disadvantage of this approach is that it is difﬁcult to put the knot
points at the same temperatures in cities with a wide range of climates,
as in the US. To address this we initially identiﬁed clusters of cities
with similar values of temperature and relative humidity and then
created a large pooled exposure--response curve for each cluster. We
subsequently studied how these curves changed over time and space from
1962 to 2006. Finally, using the same mvmeta function used for
meta-smoothing to assess temperature risk on mortality, we performed a
multivariate meta-regression analysis to assess how the risk estimates
vary with potential meta-predictors, such as climatic and socio-economic
variables, measured at the city level. This type of strategy could allow
us to build a model to predict future fatalities, inﬂuenced by climate
change in different US climate zones.

81

2. Material and methods 2.1. Mortality data We selected 211 US cities
   that had complete mortality and daily temperature (monitors that have
   at least 98% of the observations available) data with a nationwide
   geographic distribution (Fig. 1). Analyses were conducted at the city
   level, which in most cases was restricted to a single county.
   However, we used multiple counties where the city's population
   extends beyond the boundaries of one county. Individual mortality
   data was obtained from the National Center for Health Statistics
   (NCHS) and from state public health departments. Data from 1967 to
   1973 were not available because NCHS did not obtain date of death in
   those years. The mortality ﬁles provided information on the exact
   date of death and the underlying cause of death. For this study we
   selected all-cause daily mortality excluding any deaths from
   accidental causes (ICD-code 10th revision: V01-Y98, ICD-code 9th
   revision: 1-799). Overall, 42,471,868 deaths were included in the
   study. 2.2. Environmental data Meteorological measurements were
   obtained from the airport weather stations nearest to each county,
   including daily mean temperature, wind speed, sea level pressure,
   visibility and dew point (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
   Administration [NOAA]). Relative humidity was calculated with the
   following formula:   112−0:1T a þ T d 8 RH ¼ 100 112 þ 0:9T a where
   Ta represents air temperature and Td represents dew point temperature
   (Wanielista, 1990). For days of the year where monitors had missing
   data, we used the values of the nearest monitor within 60 km. 2.3.
   Socioeconomic and land use data Because we are interested in factors
   which could potentially modify the association with temperature and
   particularly ones that might be modiﬁable, we have obtained data on
   socioeconomic, land use, and other factors. From the U.S. Census
   Summary File 3 downloaded from Social Explorer, we obtained
   population density, proportion of the population below poverty level,
   proportion of the population over 25 years of age (25+) who completed
   college, proportion of the population 25+ who did not complete high
   school, and proportion of black population for the 1960--2000
   decennial censuses. Median family income in dollars for every ten
   years from 1959 to 1999 was obtained from the US Census Historical
   Income Tables for Counties (http://
   www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/county/). From the
   1992 and 2001 National Land Cover datasets, available from the
   Multi-Resolution Land Characteristics Consortium (MRLC) and the
   Enhanced Historical Land Use, and Land Cover Data for 1970--1985 from
   the US Geological Survey (USGS 1986), we calculated proportion of
   land with green surface by county for three time periods. Green land
   uses include agriculture, forests, wetlands and grasslands. Census
   and land use data were merged to individuals based on their county of
   residence, we estimated percentage of households in each city with
   central air conditioning (AC) in 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 using
   available county level or metropolitan area level data. 1970 and 1980
   county level AC data come from the US Census of Population. For later
   years metropolitan area data from the American Housing Survey (AHS)
   was used. 1990 and 2000 estimates were based on linearly
   interpolating data from available years which vary by city. For
   cities not included in the AHS, the nearest metropolitan area with
   available data was used. For northern New England cities, regional
   level data from the US Energy

82

F. Nordio et al. / Environment International 81 (2015) 80--86

Fig. 1. Map of the 211 cities in the U.S. corresponding to the cities
included in the analysis grouped into 8 clusters.

Information Administration, Ofﬁce of Energy Consumption 2009 Residential
Energy Consumption Survey were used. 2.4. Statistical analysis 2.4.1.
Stage 1: cluster analysis Cluster analysis was used to group together
cities that shared common weather characteristics. The objective was to
deﬁne groups of cities with similar weather patterns to increase the
homogeneity within groups, while at the same time making meaningful
distinctions between clusters. The variables included in the cluster
analysis were the mean and standard deviation of the seasonal
temperature and the relative humidity in each city. We used an
agglomerative hierarchical approach: we started by deﬁning each data
point to be a cluster and then combined existing clusters at each step
through the single linkage method. We used PROC CLUSTER in SAS 9.2
(Copyright © 2012 SAS Institute Inc., SAS Campus Drive, Cary, North
Carolina 27513, USA). 2.4.2. Stage 2: city-speciﬁc Poisson regression
The relationship between daily mortality and temperature was estimated
using an overdispersed Poisson generalized additive model (GAM). For
each of the i = 1,...,c cities the model was given by the following:  
 log μ ct ¼ β0 þ yc DOW t þ nsðtimet ; 6Þ þ s T clag0 ; θi ðlag0Þ  þ s
T cMA15 ; θi ðMA15Þ

ð1Þ

where μct is the expected mortality rate for each city c on day t; β0 is
the model intercept; yc is the vector of regression coefﬁcients for day
of the week for city c; DOWt is the categorical variable for day of the
week; ns(timet) is a natural cubic spline of time, with 6 degrees of
freedom per year. Tclag0 corresponds to ambient temperature on the day
of death, and TcMA15 is the mean daily temperature over lags 1--5,
computed as the moving average from day t − 1 up to the previous 5 days.
We have divided temperature this way because Braga et al. (2002)
previously reported that the effects of cold weather persisted for about
5 days while the effects of hot temperatures were more immediate. Thus
using temperature over six days, and separating out the immediate
effect, seems reasonable. We used s(Tclag0, θi(lag0)) and s(TcMA15,
θi(MA15)) to capture the heat and cold effect, respectively, where the
θi are the coefﬁcients of the splines. Both functions were chosen as a
quadratic B-spline, deﬁned by k-2 internal knots and 2 boundary knots,
where k corresponds to the dimension of the spline basis and the number
of parameters. Number and location of knots (within cluster) are chosen
by Q-AIC, a modiﬁcation of the Akaike information criterion for
quasilikelihood models (Peng et al., 2006). In the ﬁrst equation, the
knot locations vary between clusters but do not vary within the same
cluster. This

requirement assures that the estimated coefﬁcients \^θiðlag0Þ and
θ\^iðMA15Þ retain the same interpretation in all the studies belonging
to the same cluster. We initially ﬁt 211 GAM models, one for each city,
considering the entire time series from 1962 to 2006. Secondly, we
divided our analysis into speciﬁc time intervals: 1962--1966,
1973--1979, 1980--1986, 1987--1993, 1994--1999, and 2000--2006. We chose
these years with enough years to produce stable results and reduce noise
in the effect estimates but we also wanted enough categories to be able
to detect changes over time. This modeling strategy deﬁnes the exposure
on an absolute scale (°C). The two functions both labeled “s” common to
all studies are coherently deﬁned with knots placed at the same absolute
exposure values so that the estimated coefﬁcients have the same
interpretation across studies. However, some have argued that it is the
degree of unusualness that is central to the effect of temperature. For
this reason, we conducted a sensitivity analysis where we converted the
city-speciﬁc temperatures to city-speciﬁc percentiles of temperature.
This method allows the comparison of studies showing even
non-overlapping temperature ranges. Functions for non-linear
associations are usually centered on a speciﬁc value so that the results
may be interpreted as the effect of the exposure versus a reference (Cao
et al., 2006). To quantify effects of temperature changes, we centered
the curves at 15.6 °C (60 °F) following the strategy proposed by
Anderson and Bell (2009). We report the relative risk (RR) at 26.7 °C
(80 °F) compared with 15.6 °C (60 °F) (heat effect), and at 4.4 °C (40
°F) compared with 15.6 °C (60 °F) (cold effect). To quantify effects of
relative temperature changes, we also calculated the RR comparing the
1st to 50th percentiles (cold effect) and the 99th to 50th percentiles
(hot effect) of the cluster's temperature distribution. The choice of
percentiles allows us to compare the effect of relative temperature
changes in different clusters for the difference between a relatively
typical temperature (the 50th percentile) and a relatively hot one. We
have taken this value as a reference with respect to adverse
environmental conditions. 2.4.3. Stage 3: meta-smoothing and
meta-regression The city-speciﬁc estimates obtained from the Poisson
regression model are then combined through meta-smoothing. We assume
that the smooth function derived from Eq. (1) has been ﬁtted to the data
from each of the i = 1,...,c cities, producing k-length vectors of
regression coefﬁcients θ\^i, and associated k × k estimated co(variance)
matrices Si. These regression coefﬁcients are then used as outcomes for
the third stage and are deﬁned from here on as outcomes parameters. A
model for random-effect meta-regression can be written as follows: \^i 
Nk ðθ; S i þ ΨÞ θ

ð2Þ

with Si + Ψ = Σi. A random effect meta-analysis assumes that the
observed variation across city in the regression coefﬁcients has two
sources---stochastic variability (Si) and true differences across cities
in

F. Nordio et al. / Environment International 81 (2015) 80--86

the coefﬁcients θi, whose variance is Ψ. These are usually referred to
as the within city variability and the between city variability. In the
within\^i is assumed to be sampled with error city component, the
estimated θ from Nk(θ, Si), a multivariate normal distribution of
dimension k, where θi is the vector of true unknown outcome parameters
for city i. In the between-city component, θi is assumed sampled from
Nk(θ, Ψ), where Ψ is the unknown between-city (co)variance matrix. In
this case θ can be interpreted as the pooled temperature--mortality
association to plot as a single smooth function. Meta-smoothing (Eq.
(2)) was performed on each cluster and time period to obtain multiple
curves for the temperature--mortality relationship. The equation was
subsequently extended to a multivariate meta-regression, where the k
outcomes are modeled by p meta-predictors Xi measured at the city level.
The model is written as follows: \^i  Nk ðX i β; S i þ ΨÞ: θ

ð3Þ

The kp-dimensional coefﬁcient vector β deﬁnes the association of the k
outcomes with p meta-predictors. Methods to derive tests and conﬁdence
intervals along with ﬁt statistics (best-linear unbiased) predictions
have been previously developed within the linear mixed models framework
for application in this setting, together with a description of the
software implementation in the R package mvmeta (Gasparrini and
Armstrong, 2013). For ﬁxed meta-predictors included in the
meta-regression in Eq. (3), we used a dummy variable that identiﬁes the
cluster and a dummy variable that identiﬁes the time interval. In this
way it is possible to estimate the overall heat and cold effects for the
whole country. Other city-level factors were also included in the
analysis in order to explain the heterogeneity between studies.
Speciﬁcally, we used mean and standard deviation of summer and winter
temperature along with socio-economic and land use variables such as
average income, education, AC, population density, % green space and
race, as described previously. In our results we report statistics that
provide simple summaries on the extent of heterogeneity, speciﬁcally,
the Cochran Q test for (residual) heterogeneity (Berkey et al., 1996;
Ritz et al., 2008) and the I2 that measures the proportion of total
variation attributable to heterogeneity (Rücker et al., 2008).
Statistical analysis was performed in R version 3.0.1 (R Development
Core Team (2012), Vienna, Austria). 3. Results Fig. 1 shows a map of the
U.S. with the 211 selected cities. The cluster analysis identiﬁed 8
clusters represented by the different colors for the cities in the map.
Cluster 1 identiﬁes cities on the east coast over large areas of land
masses in the temperate regions of the mid-latitudes. The climate is
humid continental with warm summers and cold, snowy winters. Cluster 2
identiﬁes cities in the north-east of the country where winter is
characterized by cold temperatures. Snow is the main form of winter
precipitation, but freezing rain, sleet, and occasional rain are all
possible during the winter months. Cluster 3 is characterized by a humid
continental climate, with cold winters and long, hot summers. Cluster 4
is located to the center-east of the country and possesses a humid
subtropical climate with most of the states having mild winters and hot
summers. Cluster 5 identiﬁes the western-most coastal cities' climates,
heavily inﬂuenced by the Paciﬁc Ocean. The climate is mild, but periods
of extreme hot and cold temperatures can affect parts of the region. The
inﬂuence of the ocean generally moderates temperature extremes, creating
warmer winters and substantially cooler summers especially along the
coastal areas. Cluster 6 identiﬁes the cities along the Gulf of Mexico
where climate is humid subtropical with hot summers. This climate is
also continental, characterized by a wide annual temperature range.
Periods of extreme cold that occasionally occur are short-lived so that
mild weather predominates even during January. Cluster 7 identiﬁes the
cities in Florida and the southern-most cities

83

bordering Mexico, characterized by very hot and long summers. The
climate of the north and central parts of Florida is humid subtropical
with south Florida having a tropical climate. Finally, Cluster 8 between
California and New Mexico has a dry climate with little rainfall. In the
lower elevations, the climate is primarily desert with mild winters and
extremely hot summers. The higher altitude locations have an appreciably
cooler climate, with cold winters and mild summers, though the climate
remains semi-arid to arid. Importantly, unlike census-based regions,
these clusters can be either quite relatively small but geographically
split (e.g., CL7), or cut across multiple regions (e.g., CL2). Weather
and mortality summary statistics are provided in Table 1. We focused
descriptive results on summer and winter because they are most relevant
for the aims of this paper. Cluster 5 has the highest average daily
number of deaths compared to the other clusters. This is due to the high
population of a select group of cities that belong to this cluster, such
as Los Angeles (3,820,000 inhabitants) and San Diego (1,326,000
inhabitants). As expected, we found the highest average summer
temperature in Cluster 8 with 29.17 °C and the lowest average winter
temperature Cluster 2 with −3.19 °C. 3.1. Mortality results across
clusters Fig. 2 presents the main results applying Eq. (2). We report a
separate pooled temperature--mortality function for each cluster,
representing the population-average coefﬁcients of the quadratic
Bspline. Generally, the plot indicates an increased risk in all the
clusters for non-accidental mortality on the day of the event (lag 0)
for high temperatures, and an increased risk when the average
temperature of the ﬁve days prior to the event was very low (MA15).
There is a significant difference in the temperature--mortality function
between clusters. At lag 0, Cluster 5 has a relative risk (RR) of 1.14
(95% CI: 1.11, 1.17) for temperatures of 27 °C versus 15.6 °C, and
Cluster 6 has a RR of 1.04 (95% CI: 1.03, 1.05). These results suggest
that people who are accustomed to living in a humid subtropical climate
with hot summers like the Gulf of Mexico have a lower risk compared to
people living in a mild climate like the Paciﬁc Coast. Similarly in
Cluster 2, we found a RR of 1.12 (95% CI: 1.10, 1.13) for temperatures
of 26.7 °C versus 15.6 °C, and a RR of 1.05 (95% CI: 1.04, 1.06) in
Cluster 4. Signiﬁcant differences were also found for the cold effect.
In Cluster 7 we found a RR of 1.12 (95% CI: 1.09, 1.15) for temperatures
of 4.4 °C versus 15.6 °C versus a RR of 1.07 (95% CI: 1.06, 1.08) in
Cluster 1. These results show that in places characterized by long, cold
winters as in Cluster 1, the risk is lower than in places where winters
are not particularly cold as in Cluster 7. Fig. 2 shows that the
increase in mortality rate at − 10 °C rises substantially across cluster
as the frequency of colder Table 1 Mortality, temperature and relative
humidity summaries by clustersa.

Cluster 1 Cluster 2 Cluster 3 Cluster 4 Cluster 5 Cluster 6 Cluster 7
Cluster 8 a

Season

Average daily no. of deaths

Summer Winter Summer Winter Summer Winter Summer Winter Summer Winter
Summer Winter Summer Winter Summer Winter

17 20 11 13 12 14 10 11 27 32 10 11 14 17 12 14

Population range

47,475--8,008,278 42,331--6,925,258 92,954--2,175,343 68,247--2,914,587
128,454--9,519,338 51,616--3,400,578 16,932--2,253,362 74,492--3,072,149

Mortality and average daily temperature, 1962--2006.

Temperature °C Average

Std

22.79 0.78 21.31 −3.19 23.9 0.4 25.9 6.53 19.67 9.54 27.35 12.03 27.74
17.59 29.17 10.18

3.78 5.42 3.81 6.57 3.54 6.58 2.85 5.82 3.79 4.57 1.92 5.4 1.57 4.87
4.29 3.98

84

F. Nordio et al. / Environment International 81 (2015) 80--86

Fig. 2. Relative risk of the pooled lag 0 (A) and MA15 (B) relationship
between temperature and non-accidental mortality by clusters,
1962--2006. Reference at 15.6 °C (60 °F).

temperatures in the cluster decreases. In general, looking across the
clusters in Fig. 2A indicates that heat effects become less pronounced
in locations used to warm weather, and similarly for cold effects. This
suggests that as climate change shifts cities across clusters,
sensitivity to heat will decrease and sensitivity to cold might
increase, while the prevalence of hot and cold days moves in the
opposite direction. 3.2. Mortality results across time periods We then
examined how the temperature--mortality relationship within each cluster
varied by years. We provide an example of this added layer of analysis
with Fig. 3 portraying the temperature--mortality relationship by group
of years in Cluster 1, where we found a decrease in risk over the years.
The RR for the heat effect changes from 1.23 (95% CI: 1.20, 1.27) during
the 1962--1966 period to 1.09 (95% CI: 1.08, 1.10) during the 2000--2006
period. A similar pattern was also found for Cluster 2 with a RR of 1.25
(95% CI: 1.08, 1.10) in the 1962--1966 period and a RR of 1.08 (95% CI:
1.06, 1.09) for the 2000--2006 period. Patterns in other clusters were
more complex, and are provided in the Supplementary Tables (S1, S2).

3.3. Meta-regression Meta-regression heterogeneity tests are presented
in Table 2. The Q and I2 statistics show signiﬁcant heterogeneity in
both the heat and cold effects across cities: 59.3% of the variability
across cities in the estimated lag 0 (heat effect) and 29.1% of the
variability in the MA15 (cold effect) represented true heterogeneity in
effect in the intercept only model. When cluster and time period were
included in the meta-regressions, the AIC was reduced for both the heat
and cold effect. The dummy variables for cluster and time period
explained a substantial part of the heterogeneity between studies, with
an overall I2 of 25.1% for the heat effect compared with 59.3% with no
predictors, for example. We then examined the other potential
explanatory variables. There was no association of the socio-economic
and land-use factors with the city-speciﬁc estimates; however, mean
summer temperature and AC were signiﬁcant predictors of total mortality.
Fig. 4 shows the results of the meta-regression, where we assessed
whether summer temperature, AC and groups of years in each city modify
the association between heat effect and mortality. Each 5° increase in
mean temperature was associated with a decrease in the heat effect on
mortality by 1.78% (95% CI: 0.82, 2.74). Each 50% increase in air
conditioning prevalence was associated with a 1.37% (95% CI: 0.48, 2.26)
decrease in the heat effect on mortality. Fig. 4 shows how the pooled
risk of non-accidental deaths from all the clusters due to hot days
decreases over time, from 10.61% (95% CI: 9.10, 12.13) during the
1962--1966 period to 0.87% (95% CI: − 0.21, 1.97) in 1994--1999, taking
into account the effect of summer mean and air conditioning. Hence there
are other time varying factors inﬂuencing the decline in sensitivity to
heat besides air conditioning or mean temperature which we were unable
to identify.

Table 2 Cochran Q test and I2 for multivariate models based on relative
scale. I2

Cochran Q test

Fig. 3. Pooled lag 0 temperature--mortality functions by time period for
the relative risk between temperature and non-accidental mortality by
time periods in Cluster 1. Reference at 15.6 °C (60 °F).

Heat effect Relative scale Intercept only Clusters, time Clusters, time,
summer mean, AC Cold effect Relative scale Intercept only Clusters, time
Clusters, time, winter mean

Q

df

p

%

2933.73 1578.42 1535.37

1194 1182 1179

b0.001 b0.001 b0.001

59.3 25.1 23.2

1685.12 1436.43 1423.64

1194 1182 1181

b0.001 b0.001 b0.001

29.1 17.7 17.0

F. Nordio et al. / Environment International 81 (2015) 80--86

Fig. 4. Meta-regression analysis showing decreased risk for heat effect
over year, and for increases in summer mean temperature and air
conditioning.

As a sensitivity analysis, we ﬁt meta-regressions for each cluster
separately to see whether the decrease of risk over time was consistent
in each cluster. In six out of the eight clusters, there was a
signiﬁcant trend of decreased risk over time, and in the remaining two
it was marginally signiﬁcant (p-value b 0.10). The meta-regressions for
the cold effect did not show any signiﬁcant time trend, though the other
metapredictors in the model (clusters, winter mean temperatures) did
explain variations in cold effects, reducing I2 from 29.1% to 17.0%.
Sensitivity analysis using temperature percentiles did not show a major
difference compared to using temperature. 4. Discussion In this paper we
demonstrate a novel application of meta-regression to generate reliable
estimates of the large scale, allowing us to assess temporal and
geographic differences in dose--response, and to account for multiple
modiﬁers of the temperature--mortality associations across America. By
ﬁrst clustering cities with common temperature and humidity patterns we
were able to ﬁt splines with knots in the same location in each cluster,
making combining effects straightforward. With our large number of
cities we assured that each cluster had sufﬁcient power to stabilize
results. It also enables us to better control for such diverse
parameters as climate, time period, and geographic region, compared to
the traditional technique of univariate meta-regression without
meta-smoothing. We generated the largest known characterization to date
of the heterogeneity among relative risks calculated for the heat
effect. Our meta-regression explains most of this heterogeneity by the
differences between clusters, between time periods, and by mean summer
temperatures and air conditioning. Particularly, we demonstrate that
lower summer mean temperature is associated with higher relative risk of
death (β = − 0.0042, p-value b 0.05) and increased use of air condition
was associated with lower relative risk of death (β = −0.0003, p-value b
0.05) in association with heat. These results indicate that people
living in cities with low summer temperatures have a higher risk of
mortality during periods of high temperature, controlling for air
conditioning. This is potentially due to these populations being less
acclimated to hot temperatures, as compared to inhabitants in warmer
city clusters. While it has long been known that heat related mortality
is lower in warmer US cities, these results provide a quantitative
estimate of that effect, and similarly for winter temperature.
Importantly, these estimates are within cluster estimates of changes in
dose-- response as summer temperature increases, not cross-sectional
estimates, and are more directly applicable to estimating future changes
in dose--response. Interestingly, increases in mean summer temperature
controlling for air conditioning explain more of the adaptation process
(decrease in effect of hot temperature) than vice versa. This

85

suggests that there are important other adaptive mechanisms already
occurring, which may be more important for the future that air
conditioning, which has almost reached saturation. Physiologic
adaptation is likely important, but other factors doubtless play a role.
Although the effects found are modest changes in daily deaths, they
apply to the entire season, and so their impact is not trivial.
Moreover, our results could prove useful to understand how the risk of
death due to temperature would change if there were different conditions
of mean summer or winter temperature and air conditioning use in either
speciﬁc areas of the United States, regions, or the country as a whole.
Increases in mean winter temperature within cluster were associated with
increased susceptibility to cold days. This would be quite relevant for
modifying the dose--response curve used for risk assessments based on
scenarios of future climate change. These results are consistent with
current studies, particularly the recent publication on the
temperature--mortality association in Europe (Tobias et al., 2012).
However, we must specify some limitations to our methods. Though
previous studies suggest that air pollution is a confounding factor on
temperature and mortality, we did not have sufﬁcient pollution data for
the cities in our studies during the corresponding time frame to include
in the multivariate regression analysis (Fischer et al., 2008;
Katsouyanni et al., 1993). However, Buckley JP et al. recently argued
that pollution is not really a confounder of temperature (Buckley et
al., 2014). Our study presents novel ﬁndings that demonstrate a 42-year
nation-wide decrease in non-accidental heat related mortality with air
conditioning increases in a large number of cities while controlling for
key meta-predictors (i.e., geographic cluster, mean summer temperature).
In contrast, past research simply demonstrated the protective effect of
air conditioning in smaller sample sizes in more brief time periods,
without such control for confounders (Rogot et al., 1992; Semenza et
al., 1996; Zanobetti and Schwartz, 2005). Controlling for mean seasonal
temperature and air conditioning, we still saw a substantial decrease in
heat related deaths over the 42 years, with the decrease particularly
rapid in the early years. Our other covariates, including socioeconomic
ones were unable to explain this decline. However the decline appears to
have hit its asymptote. Similarly, a recent study (Bobb et al., 2014)
found a decline of heatrelated mortality over the years suggesting
adaptation. Interestingly our study and this one found comparable
results even though used a different number of cities, a different range
of years, different statistical methods and different deﬁnitions of
regions across the US. However, they did not ﬁnd an association with air
conditioning. These results may be weakened by the lack of city-speciﬁc
air condition usage in a few cities dictating that we assign the
available state-speciﬁc usage to those cities. Another study limitation
is that the American Housing Survey (AHS) only allowed us to control for
air condition usage after 1973 when data was ﬁrst collected. It is true
that 80% of the U.S. population now makes use of air conditioning but
that was not true in 1970. One of our goals was to estimate how changes
in air conditioning reduced susceptibility to hot days. In addition, the
remaining 20% of unair-conditioned housing are not randomly located, but
primarily in areas that have less summer heat, but where summer
temperatures are likely to increase. In these locations, there is
considerably greater room for air conditioning growth. Important changes
in the distribution of temperature are expected over the next 50 years,
and estimating the direct effects of these changes on health has
attracted national and international attention. To do so requires not
just estimates of local temperature change, such as provided by
downscaling models, but models of how mortality or other health
endpoints will vary with temperature in 50 years. By going back 50 years
in time we have shown how mortality responses to heat and to cold have
changed over time and an important deviation from linearity in that
relation. Our results are also comparable to Barnett et al. (2007). They
also looked at trends over time in heat- and cold-related mortality in
the US and found that cold is the most consistent problem. In addition,
we have identiﬁed summer mean temperature as an

86

F. Nordio et al. / Environment International 81 (2015) 80--86

important explanatory factor for both changes over time, and differences
between locations, allowing for an estimate of how future changes might
affect the dose response relationship. We have also highlighted the
effect of warmer winter temperatures on increasing the steepness of the
dose response curve at cold temperatures, which will mute, and perhaps
cancel any reduction in wintertime mortality from warmer winters. Both
results suggest the importance of usual temperature for the season in
human responses, and suggest that increased variability in temperature
may be more important than increased temperature in the direct effects
of temperature on mortality (Zanobetti et al., 2012a, 2012b; Schär et
al., 2004). The direct effects of future climate change on health cannot
be estimated using current dose--response curves, but must take into
account such changes, which will likely be location speciﬁc. In
conclusion, our novel application of meta-smoothing with multivariate
meta-regression on a large spatial--temporal scale has allowed us to
build a model that provides coefﬁcients that could be worth considered
in mortality risk assessments. The response to cold increases as winter
mean temperature rises, the response to heat declines as summer mean
temperature rises and as AC use increases. Conﬂict of interest The
authors declare that they have no actual or potential conﬂict of
interest. Acknowledgments We thank Steve Melly from Harvard T. H. Chan
School of Public Health for providing the temperature data and
city-speciﬁc variables. We also thank Dominique J. Monlezun from Tulane
School of Public Health for manuscript review. This work was supported
by grants ES020695 and ES000002. Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2015.04.009. References Analitis, A.,
Katsouyanni, K., Biggeri, A., Baccini, M., Forsberg, B., Bisanti, L.,
Kirchmayer, U., Ballester, F., Cadum, E., Goodman, P., 2008. Effects of
cold weather on mortality: results from 15 European cities within the
PHEWE project. Am. J. Epidemiol. 168, 1397--1408. Anderson, B.G., Bell,
M.L., 2009. Weather-related mortality: how heat, cold, and heat waves
affect mortality in the United States. Epidemiology 20, 205. Anderson,
G.B., Bell, M.L., 2011. Heat waves in the United States: mortality risk
during heat waves and effect modiﬁcation by heat wave characteristics in
43 US communities. Environ. Health Perspect. 119, 210. Åström, D.O.,
Forsberg, B., Edvinsson, S., Rocklöv, J., 2013. Acute fatal effects of
shortlasting extreme temperatures in Stockholm, Sweden: evidence across
a century of change. Epidemiology 24 (6), 820--829 (2013 Nov). Barnett,
A.G., Sans, S., Salomaa, V., Kuulasmaa, K., Dobson, A.J., WHO MONICA
Project, 2007. The effect of temperature on systolic blood pressure.
Blood Press Monit. 12 (3), 195--203 (2007 Jun). Barreca, A., Clay, K.,
Deschenes, O., Greenstone, M., Shapiro, J.S., 2013. Adapting to Climate
Change: The Remarkable Decline in the US Temperature--Mortality
Relationship over the 20th Century. National Bureau of Economic
Research. Basu, R., Ostro, B.D., 2008. A multicounty analysis
identifying the populations vulnerable to mortality associated with high
ambient temperature in California. Am. J. Epidemiol. 168, 632--637.
Berkey, C., Anderson, J., Hoaglin, D., 1996. Multiple-outcome
meta-analysis of clinical trials. Stat. Med. 15, 537--557. Bobb, J.F.,
Peng, R.D., Bell, M.L., Dominici, F., 2014. Heat-related mortality and
adaptation to heat in the United States. Environ. Health Perspect. 122
(8), 811--816 (2014 Aug, Epub 2014 Apr 25). Braga, A.L., Zanobetti, A.,
Schwartz, J., 2001. The time course of weather-related deaths.
Epidemiology 12, 662--667. Braga, A.L., Zanobetti, A., Schwartz, J.,
2002. The effect of weather on respiratory and cardiovascular deaths in
12 U.S. cities. Environ. Health Perspect. 110 (9), 859--863 (2002 Sep).

Buckley, J.P., Samet, J.M., Richardson, D.B., 2014. Commentary: does air
pollution confound studies of temperature? Epidemiology 25 (2), 242--245
(March 2014). Cao, J., Valois, M.-F., Goldberg, M.S., 2006. An S-Plus
function to calculate relative risks and adjusted means for regression
models using natural splines. Comput. Methods Prog. Biomed. 84, 58--62.
Curriero, F.C., Heiner, K.S., Samet, J.M., Zeger, S.L., Strug, L., Patz,
J.A., 2002. Temperature and mortality in 11 cities of the eastern United
States. Am. J. Epidemiol. 155, 80--87. Deschênes, O., Greenstone, M.,
2011. Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: evidence from annual
ﬂuctuations in weather in the US. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 3, 152--185.
Fischer, P., Ameling, C., Marra, M., 2008. Effect of interaction between
temperature and air pollution on daily mortality during heat-waves.
Epidemiology 19, S379. Gasparrini, A., Armstrong, B., 2013. Reducing and
meta-analyzing estimates from distributed lag nonlinear models. BMC Med.
Res. Methodol. 13 (1). Gasparrini, A., Armstrong, B., Kenward, M., 2012.
Multivariate meta-analysis for nonlinear and other multi-parameter
associations. Stat. Med. 31, 3821--3839. Guo, Y., Gasparrini, A.,
Armstrong, B., Li, S., Tawatsupa, B., Tobias, A., Lavigne, E., de Sousa
Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, M., Leone, M., Pan, X., Tong, S., Tian, L.,
Kim, H., Hashizume, M., Honda, Y., Guo, Y.L., Wu, C.F., Punnasiri, K.,
Yi, S.M., Michelozzi, P., Saldiva, P.H., Williams, G., 2014. Global
variation in the effects of ambient temperature on mortality: a
systematic evaluation. Epidemiology 25 (6), 781--789 (2014 Nov). Hajat,
S., Kosatky, T., 2010. Heat-related mortality: a review and exploration
of heterogeneity. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 64, 753--760. Huang,
C., Barnett, A.G., Wang, X., Vaneckova, P., FitzGerald, G., Tong, S.,
2011. Projecting future heat-related mortality under climate change
scenarios: a systematic review. Environ. Health Perspect. 119 (12),
1681. Katsouyanni, K., Pantazopoulou, A., Touloumi, G., Tselepidaki, I.,
Moustris, K., Asimakopoulos, D., Poulopoulou, G., Trichopoulos, D.,
1993. Evidence for interaction between air pollution and high
temperature in the causation of excess mortality. Arch. Environ. Health
Int. J. 48, 235--242. Medina-Ramón, M., Schwartz, J., 2007. Temperature,
temperature extremes, and mortality: a study of acclimatisation and
effect modiﬁcation in 50 US cities. Occup. Environ. Med. 64, 827--833.
Peng, R.D., Dominici, F., Louis, T.A., 2006. Model choice in time series
studies of air pollution and mortality. J. R. Stat. Soc. A. Stat. Soc.
169, 179--203. Peng, R.D., Bobb, J.F., Tebaldi, C., McDaniel, L., Bell,
M.L., Dominici, F., 2011. Toward a quantitative estimate of future heat
wave mortality under global climate change. Environ. Health Perspect.
119, 701. Core Team, R., 2012. R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing Vienna,
Austria 3-900051-07-0 URL http:// www.R-project.org/. Ritz, J.,
Demidenko, E., Spiegelman, D., 2008. Multivariate meta-analysis for data
consortia, individual patient meta-analysis, and pooling projects. J.
Stat. Plan. Infer. 138, 1919--1933. Rogot, E., Sorlie, P.D., Backlund,
E., 1992. Air-conditioning and mortality in hot weather. Am. J.
Epidemiol. 136, 106--116. Rücker, G., Schwarzer, G., Carpenter, J.R.,
Schumacher, M., 2008. Undue reliance on I2 in assessing heterogeneity
may mislead. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 8, 79. Schär, C., Vidale, P.L.,
Lüthi, D., Frei, C., Häberli, C., Liniger, M.A., Appenzeller, C., 2004.
The role of increasing temperature variability in European summer
heatwaves. Nature 427 (6972), 332--336 (2004 Jan 22, Epub 2004 Jan 11).
Schwartz, J., Zanobetti, A., 2000. Using meta-smoothing to estimate
dose--response trends across multiple studies, with application to air
pollution and daily death. Epidemiology 11, 666--672. Semenza, J.C.,
Rubin, C.H., Falter, K.H., Selanikio, J.D., Flanders, W.D., Howe, H.L.,
Wilhelm, J.L., 1996. Heat-related deaths during the July 1995 heat wave
in Chicago. N. Engl. J. Med. 335, 84--90. Stieb, D.M., Judek, S.,
Burnett, R.T., 2002. Meta-analysis of time-series studies of air
pollution and mortality: effects of gases and particles and the inﬂuence
of cause of death, age, and season. J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc. 52,
470--484. Survey, U.S.G. Land use and land cover digital data from
1:250,000- and 1:100,000-scale maps. 1986. Tobias, A., Armstrong, B.,
Zuza, I., Gasparrini, A., Linares, C., Diaz, J., 2012. Mortality on
extreme heat days using ofﬁcial thresholds in Spain: a multi-city time
series analysis. BMC Public Health 12, 133. Voorhees, A.S., Fann, N.,
Fulcher, C., Dolwick, P., Hubbell, B., Bierwagen, B., Moreﬁeld, P.,
2011. Climate change-related temperature impacts on warm season heat
mortality: a proof-of-concept methodology using BenMAP. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 45, 1450--1457. Wanielista, M.P., 1990. Hydrology and Water
Quantity Control. Yu, W., Vaneckova, P., Mengersen, K., Pan, X., Tong,
S., 2010. Is the association between temperature and mortality modiﬁed
by age, gender and socio-economic status? Sci. Total Environ. 408,
3513--3518. Zanobetti, A., Schwartz, J., 2005. Disparities by race in
heat-related mortality in four US cities: the role of air conditioning
prevalence. J. Urban Health 82, 191--197. Zanobetti, A., O'Neill, M.S.,
Gronlund, C.J., Schwartz, J.D., 2012a. Summer temperature variability
and long-term survival among elderly people with chronic disease. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 6608--6613. Zanobetti, A., O'Neill, M.S.,
Gronlund, C.J., Schwartz, J.D., 2012b. Summer temperature variability
and long-term survival among elderly people with chronic disease. PNAS
USA 109 (17), 6608--6613 (2012 Apr 24).


