Research | Children's Health

A Section 508--conformant HTML version of this article is available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307419.

Prenatal Air Pollution Exposure and Newborn Blood Pressure Lenie van
Rossem,1,2 Sheryl L. Rifas-Shiman,3 Steven J. Melly,1 Itai Kloog,1,4
Heike Luttmann-Gibson,1 Antonella Zanobetti,1 Brent A. Coull,5 Joel D.
Schwartz,1,6 Murray A. Mittleman,1,7 Emily Oken,3 Matthew W. Gillman,3,8
Petros Koutrakis,1 and Diane R. Gold 1,6 1Department

of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA; 2Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 3Obesity
Prevention Program, Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical
School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA; 4Department of Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; 5Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA; 6Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;
7Cardiovascular Epidemiology Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA; 8Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Background: Air pollution exposure has been associated with increased
blood pressure in adults. Objective: We examined associations of
antenatal exposure to ambient air pollution with newborn systolic blood
pressure (SBP). Methods: We studied 1,131 mother--infant pairs in a
Boston, Massachusetts, area pre-birth cohort. We calculated average
exposures by trimester and during the 2 to 90 days before birth for
temporally resolved fine particulate matter (≤ 2.5 μm; PM2.5), black
carbon (BC), nitrogen oxides, nitrogen dioxide, ozone (O3), and carbon
monoxide measured at stationary monitoring sites, and for
spatiotemporally resolved estimates of PM2.5 and BC at the residence
level. We measured SBP at a mean age of 30 ± 18 hr with an automated
device. We used mixed-effects models to examine associations between air
pollutant exposures and SBP, taking into account measurement
circumstances; child's birth weight; mother's age, race/ethnicity,
socioeconomic position, and thirdtrimester BP; and time trend. Estimates
represent differences in SBP associated with an interquartile range
(IQR) increase in each pollutant. Results: Higher mean PM2.5 and BC
exposures during the third trimester were associated with higher SBP
(e.g., 1.0 mmHg; 95% CI: 0.1, 1.8 for a 0.32-μg/m3 increase in mean
90-day residential BC). In contrast, O3 was negatively associated with
SBP (e.g., --2.3 mmHg; 95% CI: --4.4, --0.2 for a 13.5-ppb increase
during the 90 days before birth). Conclusions: Exposures to PM2.5 and BC
in late pregnancy were positively associated with newborn SBP, whereas
O3 was negatively associated with SBP. Longitudinal follow-up will
enable us to assess the implications of these findings for health during
later childhood and adulthood. Citation: van Rossem L, Rifas-Shiman SL,
Melly SJ, Kloog I, Luttmann-Gibson H, Zanobetti A, Coull BA, Schwartz
JD, Mittleman MA, Oken E, Gillman MW, Koutrakis P, Gold DR. 2015.
Prenatal air pollution exposure and newborn blood pressure. Environ
Health Perspect 123:353--359; http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307419

Introduction

During the prenatal period, a critical period for cardiovascular growth
and development, fetuses may be especially vulnerable to adverse health
effects of ambient air pollution (Selevan et al. 2000). Earlier studies
have reported associations of greater prenatal exposure to air pollution
to low birth weight, preterm birth (Bonzini et al. 2010; Bosetti et al.
2010; Ghosh et al. 2007; Glinianaia et al. 2004; Maisonet et al. 2004;
Shah and Balkhair 2011; Srám et al. 2005; Stillerman et al. 2008), and
higher maternal blood pressure (BP) in pregnancy (van den Hooven et al.
2011). Effects of prenatal air pollution on neonatal BP have not been
explored previously, but there is evidence that infant BP is influenced
by prenatal maternal conditions including hypertension and maternal drug
use (Kent et al. 2009) and by infant's weight, gestational age, and
postnatal age (Gillman et al. 2004; Huxley et al. 2000; Kent et al.
2009; Morrison et al. 2013; Simonetti et al. 2011). In adults, air
pollution has been positively associated with BP (reviewed by

Brook 2005), although inverse associations between BP and the pollutants
particulate matter (PM) and nitrogen oxides (NO x ) have also been
reported (Hampel et al. 2011; Sørensen et al. 2012). Some studies have
reported an association between air pollution and higher BP in healthy
children (Bilenko et al. 2015; Sughis et al. 2012). Despite the abundant
research interest in the early origins of vascular dysfunction, we know
of no published study that has assessed the association between prenatal
exposure to ambient air pollution and offspring BP. In this study we
investigated associations of prenatal exposures to air pollution [PM
≤ 2.5 μm (PM2.5), black carbon (BC), NOx, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone
(O3), and carbon monoxide (CO)] with BP in newborns. Although prior
studies have generally used PM as a proxy for air pollution exposure
(Brook and Rajagopalan 2009), we also considered BC, which is a
traffic-related component of PM that has been associated with BP in
adults (Mordukhovich et al. 2009). We hypothesized that PM 2.5, BC,

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 123 | number 4 | April 2015

NO x, or NO 2 exposure during pregnancy would be associated with higher
newborn BP. We had no prior hypothesis regarding the direction of the
association between O3 and newborn BP, given the conflicting results
reported in adults, including the findings from our research group of
lower BP with increased O 3 among adults with diabetes in Boston
(Hoffmann et al. 2012). The latter research shows that the direction of
the association may be different in vulnerable subgroups, such as
newborns. In addition, although ambient monitors have been used in prior
cohort studies to examine effects of pollution exposure, more emphasis
is now shifting to spatiotemporal models that capture geographic
variations in exposure within a metropolitan area. We have ­incorporated
this for PM2.5 and BC.

Methods Study design and participants. Study subjects were participants
in Project Viva, a prospective pre-birth observational cohort study of
the influences of antenatal and perinatal factors on maternal and child
health. We recruited women who were attending their initial prenatal
visit at one of eight urban and suburban obstetrical offices of Harvard
Vanguard Medical Associations, a multispecialty group practice located
in eastern Massachusetts, between April 1999 and July 2002. Details of
recruitment and retention procedures are available elsewhere (Gillman
et al. 2004). The human subjects committees Address correspondence to
L. van Rossem, Harvard School of Public Health, Exposure, Epidemiology
and Risk (EER) Program, 401 Park Dr. West, P.O. Box 15677, Boston, MA
02215 USA. Telephone: (617) 384-8823. E-mail: l.vanrossem@umcutrecht.nl
Supplemental Material is available online (http://
dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307419). We thank all the participants and staff
of Project Viva. This study was funded by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (RD83479801) and the National Institutes of Health
(K24 HD069408, R37 HD 034568, P01 ES009825). The authors declare they
have no actual or potential competing financial interests. Received:
25 July 2013; Accepted: 26 January 2015; Advance Publication: 27 January
2015; Final Publication: 1 April 2015.

353

van Rossem et al.

of participating institutes approved the study protocols, and all
mothers provided written informed consent. All procedures were in
accordance with the ethical standards for human experimentation
established by the Declaration of Helsinki. The cohort started with
2,128 live births. We performed in-person visits during the inpatient
hospital stay with mothers only on weekdays (n = 1,714, 81%), and we
measured BP of their newborns (n  = 1,131, 66%). Reasons for not
obtaining a BP measurement were parents not giving consent for
measurements (n  = 328), infant not available when staff was present (n 
= 104), infant transferred to neonatal intensive care unit (n  = 78),
measurements could not be performed (infant too fussy) (n  = 32), and
other reasons (n = 41).

Measurements Participant characteristics. Maternal age (years) was
ascertained at enrollment. Maternal third-trimester BP (mmHg) obtained
from the medical record was calculated as the average BP between 28 and
32 weeks of gestation. Maternal prepregnancy weight and height [which we
used to calculate body mass index (BMI)] and serial urine and BP
measurements (which we used to identify gestational hypertension or
preeclampsia) were derived from the medical record. Mother's
self-reported race/ ethnicity was categorized as black, Hispanic, white,
or other. Maternal smoking and physical activity were also
self-reported. We obtained birth weight (kilograms) and date of birth
from the hospital record. We included socioeconomic status on an
individual level estimated by maternal education at enrollment (college
graduate vs. less) and at the neighborhood level as median household
income derived from the Census 2000 (http://www.
census.gov/prod/cen2000/doc/sf3.pdf). Outcome. We measured newborn BP
with a Dinamap Pro 100 (Critikon Inc.; or, before 21 February 2001,
model 8100) automated oscillometric recorder (GE Medical Services,
Tampa, FL) according to a standardized protocol. For each of five
measurements taken 1 min apart, we also recorded conditions during the
measurement: infant position (in bassinet or held), extremity used (left
or right arm), cuff size, and infant state (quiet sleep, active sleep,
quiet awake, active awake). We obtained 5 readings on 1,092 infants, 4
readings on 15 infants, 3 readings on 7 infants, 2 readings on 7
infants, and 1 reading on 10 infants, for a total of 5,565 readings on
the 1,131 participants. We used systolic BP rather than diastolic BP as
our primary outcome because of the validity of its measurement with the
oscillometric device and superior prediction of long-term BP (Gillman
and Cook 1995).

354

Temporally resolved exposure measures. Ambient concentrations of fine
particle mass (PM2.5) and BC were measured hourly at a central
monitoring site (Harvard Supersite) in Boston. We measured PM 2.5
concentrations with a tapered element oscillation microbalance (model
1400A; Rupprecht and Pastashnick, East Greenbush, NY), and BC
concentrations using an aethalometer (model AE-16; Magee Scientific Co.,
Berkeley, CA). Air sampling, processing of samples, analysis, and
reporting were conducted according to standard operating procedures
(Kang et al. 2010). We calculated hourly ambient concentrations of the
sum of nitrogen oxides (NO x = NO 2 + NO), NO 2, O 3, and CO by
averaging data from the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection's Greater Boston monitoring sites (http://
public.dep.state.ma.us/MassAir/) (n  = 4 for CO and O3; n = 5 for NO2
and NOx); thus, these estimates represent a city-wide exposure. Most of
the nitrogen oxides emitted by traffic are in the form of nitric oxide
(NO); however, part of NO is oxidized to NO2 by O3. Therefore, we
consider NOx as a more robust metric of nitrogen oxide exposures related
to traffic, though NO2 is more often used as a marker in air pollution
studies. Weather data were collected from the National Weather Service
Station at Logan Airport (East Boston, MA; http://w1.weather.
gov/obhistory/KBOS.html). Missing hourly data for PM2.5 and BC (but not
other pollution or weather parameters) were imputed. This imputation
procedure used long-term trend; seasonality (sine and cosine terms);
season (1 = May--September, 0 = otherwise); hour of the day; day of the
week; weather (barometric pressure, relative humidity, mean temperature,
horizontal visibility, wind direction, and wind speed); gases: CO, NO2,
SO2; ozone during summer months; and interactions with season, wind, and
hour of the day. In total, 2% of the 24-hr PM2.5 and BC estimates were
imputed. All the pollutants were first summarized in 24-hr (0900--0900
hours) intervals. For calculating the trimester-specific exposures, we
calculated gestational age at birth from the last menstrual period or
from the second-trimester ultrasound if the two estimates differed by
> 10 days (n  = 200, 9%). Trimester 1 ended at last menstrual
period + 93 days, trimester 2 at last menstrual period + 187 days, and
trimester 3 at the day before birth. We also calculated different time
windows of exposure to air pollution (“moving averages”) from 2 to 7,
14, 30, 60, and 90 days before birth for a more specific evaluation of
air pollution exposures close to the time of birth. The moving averages
excluded the day of the BP measurement. For each central-site exposure
period of volume

interest, for each participant, we required that participants live
within 40 km of the Harvard Supersite and that exposure data be
available for at least 75% of the time in the specific averaging period;
otherwise, the exposure was set to missing. Spatially and temporally
resolved estimated PM 2.5 and BC exposures. Mothers reported their home
address at enrollment and updated it at each subsequent study visit,
including at birth. We geocoded addresses using ArcGIS (ESRI, Redlands,
CA; http:// www.arcgis.com) software StreetMap (Firefox, Mozilla) data.
Estimated spatially and temporally resolved PM 2.5 exposure data were
generated by previously described PM2.5 prediction models validated for
the New England region (Kloog et al. 2012). In brief, we used
mixed-effects models with random slopes and intercepts for day to
calibrate satellite aerosol optical depth (AOD) data at a resolution of
a 10 × 10 km spatial grid (2000--2008) with monitored ground PM2.5
measurements. We then used a generalized additive mixed model with
spatial smoothing to estimate PM2.5 in location--day pairs with missing
AOD satellite data (e.g., due to snow, clouds), using regional measured
PM2.5, AOD values in neighboring cells, and land use variables.
“Out-of-sample” 10-fold cross-validation was used to quantify the
accuracy of our predictions. That is, 10% of the days were held out of
the analysis that generated the prediction, and the accuracy was tested
against those held-out measurements. This was repeated 10 times. For
days with available AOD data, we found high “out-of-sample” R 2 (mean
“out-of-sample” R2 = 0.87). For days without AOD values, our model
performance was also excellent (mean “out-of-sample” R2 = 0.85). A
regression of the held-out data against the predicted had a slope of 1,
indicating no bias. To estimate daily spatially and temporally resolved
PM2.5 exposure, each residence (for the period when the participant
lived there) was linked to the 10 × 10 km grid in which it was located.
Exposure by trimester and for each averaging period was calculated by
averaging daily PM2.5 concentrations as described above. Because PM2.5
was modeled for 2000-- 2008, data were missing for newborns born between
April and December 1999. We predicted individual-level estimates of
residential BC concentrations from a validated spatiotemporal land-use
regression model. Details of the model and its validation have been
published earlier (Gryparis et al. 2007; Zanobetti et al. 2014). In
short, daily concentrations at the Boston central-site monitor were used
as a predictor to reflect average concentration levels for a given day,
serving as a direct estimate of the daily time effect. Out-ofsample
cross-validation at 32 monitoring sites

123 | number 4 | April 2015  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Air pollution and newborn BP

showed an average correlation of 0.73 between predicted and observed
daily BC levels. Data from 148 other stationary air monitors were used
to fit the model and estimate the effect of each covariate in the
land-use regression model. Covariates in the BC prediction model
included measures of land use for each address (cumulative traffic
density within 100 m, population density, percent urbanization),
location (latitude and longitude), daily meteoro­logical factors
(apparent temperature, wind speed, and height of the planetary boundary
layer), and temporal factors (day of week and day of season). Separate
models were fit for the warm and cold season. Interaction terms between
the temporal meteorological predictors and land-use variables allowed
for space--time interactions. Regression splines allowed main effect
terms to nonlinearly predict exposure levels, and thin-plate splines
modeled the residual spatial variability additional spatial variability
unaccounted for by the spatial predictors. Daily BC predictions outside
of the observed range of the monitored exposure measurements were
excluded. To assess the validity of the model, we checked different
specifications of the hyper­ parameters. The results were reasonably
robust to even large changes in the specification of the
hyperparameters. Statistical analyses. To assess associations between
air pollutants and newborn systolic BP, we used mixed-effects models
that incorporated each of the up to five BP measurements from each
infant as repeated outcome measures (Laird and Ware 1982). Some
advantages of this modeling approach, compared with using the average of
available measures for each child as the outcome, are that persons with
more measurements and less variability among those measurements receive
more weight than those with fewer measurements and/or more variability
(Fitzmaurice et al. 2011). We modeled each environmental exposure
separately. In all multivariable models, we adjusted for order of
measurement and infant state during the measurement. We also adjusted
for maternal age, maternal third-trimester BP, and infant's postnatal
age (in hours) and birth weight, because these variables were predictive
of newborn BP in an earlier report (Gillman et al. 2004). We adjusted
for mother's race/ ethnicity (categori­c al: black, Hispanic, other,
white), and for mother's educational level (categorical: college degree
vs. less), and median neighborhood income (continuous) as indicators of
socioeconomic position. Using penalized splines in R version 2.10.0 (R
Development Core Team, Vienna, Austria), the model included a variable
representing date to take into account seasonality and time trend.
Furthermore, we included outdoor

temperature (continuous) on the day of the BP measurement. Other weather
conditions did not change the estimates of BP (data not shown), and were
therefore not included in the model. We visually checked continuous
variables for departure from linearity with the outcome with penali­zed
splines, which was not the case for any variable (data not shown). The
estimates were scaled to the interquartile range (IQR) (25th to 75th
percentile), and reported with their 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
Each estimate gives the difference in BP in mmHg for each IQR increase
in the pollutant. We performed a series of sensitivity analyses. First,
we considered multi-pollutant models, one with PM2.5 and O3 together in
the same model, and another with O3 and NOx together. Second, mother's
BP, infant birth weight, and gestational age could be mediators in the
association between trimester-specific exposure to air pollution and
newborn BP. Therefore, we also ran a model excluding these potential
intermediates. Third, the association of air pollution with BP may
differ according to level of specific characteristics, because of
differential vulnerability of subgroups to the effect of air pollution
on BP. Therefore, using interaction terms, we evaluated infant sex (boy
vs. girl), socioeconomic status [both on a neighborhood (median income
on a continuous scale) and individual level (college graduate vs.
less)], race/ ethnicity (black, Hispanic, other vs. white), gestational
age (weeks); and for O3 season as potential effect modifiers (warm
season: May-- September; cold season: October--April). We considered
effect modification present if the p-value of the interaction term was
< 0.05. Fourth, for the central monitor exposures we restricted the
sample to mothers who lived within 10 km of the Harvard Supersite.
Fifth, we restricted the models for the spatiotemporal variables to
those children who had information on the temporal variables. Sixth, we
repeated the analyses with diastolic BP. Last, we considered additional
lifestyle and maternal comorbidities (i.e., maternal physical activity,
obesity, parity, preeclampsia, hypertension, and cesarean section) as
confounding factors by adding these to the multivariable models and
checking the change in estimate for BP. Statistical analyses were
performed using SAS (version 9.2; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) and
R version 2.10.0. A p-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

Results Table 1 shows the characteristics of the mother--infant pairs in
the study, and Supplemental Material, Table S1, shows the association of
these characteristics with third-trimester air pollution exposures. The
children included in this study were all born

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 123 | number 4 | April 2015

at 33--42 weeks, although only 4% were born before 37 weeks of
gestation. Mean BP of children born preterm (72.3 ± 9.7 mmHg) and
children born term (72.5 ± 8.9 mmHg) was similar. Mean BP varied
according to infant's state (quiet sleep: 70.5 ± 7.9 mmHg; active sleep:
72.1 ± 9.2 mmHg; quiet awake: 74.3 ± 9.3 mmHg; active awake:
77.3 ± 10.3 mmHg). Compared with the 997 mothers of infants who had no
BP measurement at birth, the 1,131 participants included in this
analysis had higher educational level (67.0% vs. 62.0% completed more
than a college degree), had a higher proportion of white race/ethnicity
(68.7% vs. 64.0%), and their children had a higher birth weight (3.52
vs. 3.39 kg) and gestational age (39.7 vs. 39.1 weeks). Participants
included in the study did not differ substantially with respect to
income, smoking status, maternal age, or maternal third-trimester BP
compared with those excluded (data not shown) or with the whole study
population. A comparison of characteristics between the study population
and the analysis sample is presented in Supplemental Material, Table S2.
We present the distributions of air pollutant concentrations for the 2-,
30-, and 90-day moving averages in Supplemental Material, Table S3, and
the correlation between 2- and 90-day Table 1. Characteristics of 1,131
mother--infant pairs with neonatal blood pressure measurements in
Project Viva. n (%) or Characteristic mean ± SD Maternal characteristic
Maternal age (years) 32.0 ± 5.3 Maternal education College graduate 752
(67.0) Mother's race/ethnicity Black 193 (17.2) Hispanic 70 (6.2) White
771 (68.7) Other 89 (7.9) Median income in neighborhooda
$58,604 ± $24,833 Maternal smoking during pregnancy Never 778 (69.2)
Former 213 (19.0) Smoker 133 (11.8) Maternal third-trimester SBP
111.1 ± 8.1 (mmHg)b Gestational age (weeks) 39.7 ± 1.4 Preterm birth
(< 37 weeks) Yes 47 (4.2) No 1,084 (95.8) Child characteristic Birth
weight (kg) 3.52 ± 0.50 Birth weight for gestational age 0.20 ± 0.95
z-score Newborn BP (mmHg) 72.5 ± 9.0 Infant state at BP measurement
Quiet sleep 551 (48.7) Active sleep 131 (11.6) Quiet awake 351 (31.8)
Active awake 98 (8.7) a Census

data for address at birth available for 1,125 families. bAvailable for
1,126 mothers.

355

van Rossem et al.

moving averages in Supplemental Material, Tables S4 and S5. Correlations
were high for PM2.5 but more moderate for BC, especially with increasing
number of days averaged. IQR was lower in magnitude with higher number
of days averaged. In multivariate analyses, newborn SBP was 1.4 mmHg
(95% CI: 0.3, 2.5) higher in association with an IQR increase in
temporally resolved BC averaged over the third trimester (Table 2). In
contrast, SBP was --2.5 mmHg (95% CI: --4.5, --0.4) lower in association
with an IQR increase in third-trimester O3. Second-trimester temporally
resolved PM 2.5 and BC were not associated with newborn SBP. Higher
second-trimester averaged concentrations of the gaseous pollutants NOx
and CO were negatively associated with changes in BP. Higher
second-trimester averaged concentration of the secondary gaseous
pollutant O3 was positively ­associated with changes in SBP. There were
no statistical associations between exposure to any air pollutant in the
first trimester and newborn SBP. A key result of this study is our
finding of associations of neonatal BP with spatiotemporally resolved as
well as temporally resolved air pollution. The association of SBP with
spatio­temporally resolved third-trimester BC was consistent with that
for temporally resolved BC (1.0 mmHg higher; 95% CI: 0.2, 1.8) for an
IQR increase. For PM2.5 both temporally and spatiotemporally resolved
exposures were not associated with SBP. For BC and PM 2.5 , cumulative
2- to 90-day exposure was positively associated with SBP, and suggested
possible effects of short-term exposures, as well as effects of more
long-term exposures (Figure 1). Associations for temporally resolved and
spatiotemporally resolved BC and PM2.5 were similar, although
associations with spatio­ temporally resolved PM2.5 seemed to decrease
for longer-term exposures. For the gases, the predominant associations
were related to long-term 30- to 90-day averages (Figure 2),
particularly for O3 and NOx, where O3 was negatively associated with SBP
and NOx was positively associated with SBP. We performed a series of
sensitivity analyses. First, we considered two-pollutant models for
60-day moving averages that included temporally resolved BC and O3 or
NOx and O3. The correlation between the 60-day moving averages of BC and
O3 was --0.17. In the multi-pollutant model, the associations for BC and
O3 with newborn SBP were attenuated when both were included in the
model: BC from 1.2 mmHg (95% CI: 0.2, 2.1) to 0.7 mmHg (95% CI:
--0.3, 1.6), and estimates for O3 attenuated from --3.3 mmHg (95% CI:
--5.3, --1.3) to --2.8 mmHg (95% CI: --4.9, --0.8). The

356

correlation between the 60-day moving averages of NOx and O3 was --0.9.
In the multi-pollutant model the association for NO x with newborn SBP
was attenuated when including both NOx and O3 in the model: NOx changed
from 2.1 mmHg (95% CI: 0.2, 3.9) to --0.7 mmHg (95% CI: --3.4, 2.1), but
the estimate for O3 increased from --3.3 mmHg (95% CI: --5.3, --1.3) to
--3.9 mmHg (95% CI: --5.8, --1.9). In a two-pollutant model with PM2.5
and O3, the estimates were fairly similar to the estimates of the
one-pollutant model (data not shown). To assess the robustness of the
short-term averages, we also ran a two-pollutant model including
short-term BC/PM 2.5 and O 3 ; estimates of BC, PM2.5, and O3 were
fairly similar to the estimates of the one-pollutant model (data not
shown). Excluding mother's BP and birth weight from the model did not
materially change the estimated associations, suggesting that these
factors did not mediate the relationship (data not shown). Effect
modification models resulted in interaction terms for child's sex,
socio­ economic status, race/ethnicity, gestational age/preterm birth,
and season (tested for O3) that were mostly associated with p-values
> 0.10 (data not shown), so we did not stratify

the results. Restricting the sample to mothers who lived within 10 km
(2,776/5,565 observations) of the monitoring site produced similar
estimates, and restricting the spatiotemporal models to participants who
also had data for the temporal models (5,140/5,565) did not change the
estimates (data not shown). Last, repeated analyses with diastolic BP
were similar in relative magnitude and direction, but seemed weaker
overall (see Supplemental Material, Table S6 and Figures S1 and S2). In
general, adjusting for maternal physical activity, obesity, parity,
preeclampsia, hypertension, and cesarean section did not substantially
influence associations between newborn SBP and air pollutants (data not
shown).

Discussion In this study of prenatal air pollution and newborn BP, we
found that higher short-term and longer-term trimester-specific
concentrations of PM 2.5 and BC were associated with higher newborn BP,
whereas higher concentrations of NO2, NOx, and O3 were associated with
lower and higher newborn BP (depending on the pregnancy period).
Associations were mainly seen in the second and third trimesters, and
for PM2.5 and BC for both shorter- and, particularly for BC,

Table 2. Association between IQR of trimester-specific estimates of air
pollution and SBP (mmHg) in newborns (single-pollutant model). Exposure
Spatiotemporally resolved PM2.5 n IQR (μg/m3) β (95% CI) Temporally
resolved PM2.5 n IQR (μg/m3) β (95% CI) Spatiotemporally resolved BC n
IQR (μg/m3) β (95% CI) Temporally resolved BC n IQR (μg/m3) β (95% CI)
NO2 n IQR (ppm) β (95% CI) NOx n IQR (ppm) β (95% CI) O3 n IQR (ppm) β
(95% CI) CO n IQR (ppb) β (95% CI)

1st Trimester

2nd Trimester

3rd Trimester

765 2.29 --0.3 (--1.3, 0.7)

845 1.97 0.4 (--0.4, 1.2)

970 2.24 0.3 (--0.6, 1.2)

1,032 2.35 0.1 (--0.9, 1.2)

1,031 1.77 0.1 (--0.7, 1.0)

1,030 2.05 0.5 (--0.4, 1.5)

1,099 0.36 0.00 (--0.8, 0.8)

1,099 0.33 0.3 (--0.5, 1.0)

1,102 0.33 1.0 (0.2, 1.8)

1,032 0.15 --0.9 (--1.7, 0.0)

1,031 0.16 0.3 (--1.1, 1.6)

1,030 0.18 1.4 (0.3, 2.5)

1,032 2.63 0.3 (--0.8, 1.5)

1,031 2.96 --0.5 (--1.9, 0.8)

1,030 3.16 --0.5 (--1.8, 0.7)

1,032 16.7 0.3 (--0.8, 1.4)

1,031 17.8 --1.6 (--2.9, --0.2)

1,030 18.2 0.6 (--1.2, 2.5)

1,032 13.0 1.2 (--1.0, 3.5)

1,031 12.8 1.7 (0.3, 3.0)

1,030 13.6 --2.5 (--4.5, --0.4)

1,032 295.3 1.9 (--0.1, 3.9)

1,031 269.4 --2.4 (--3.8, --1.0)

1,030 218.1 0.1 (--1.5, 1.7)

Estimates are adjusted for neighborhood median income; mother's age,
third-trimester BP, educational level, and race/ ethnicity; child birth
weight; infant's age at BP measurement, BP measurement conditions; and
time trend.

volume

123 | number 4 | April 2015  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Air pollution and newborn BP

(Brook et al. 2009), the strong negative correlations make it difficult
to disentangle effects. In two-pollutant models, O3 was robust to
adjustment for BC and NO2, but the estimates for BC and NO2 were
attenuated.

The consistent findings of short-term PM associations, and short- and
longer-term (30- to 90-day and trimester-specific) BC associations with
BP suggest that these associations were not confounded by season or

3

3 T-PM2.5

ΔSBP (mmHg) per IQR increment in pollutant

ST-PM2.5 2

2

1

1

0

0

--1 3

2

3

4

5

6

7

14

30

60

90

--1

2

2

1

1

0

0

2

2

3

ST-BC

--1

3

4

5

6

7

14

30

60

90

3

4

5

6

7

14

30

60

90

T-BC

--1

2

3

4

5

6

7

14

30

60

90

Air pollution exposure averaged over the last 2 to 90 days before birth

Figure 1. Association of spatiotemporally (ST) resolved PM2.5 exposure,
temporally (T) resolved PM2.5, spatiotemporally resolved BC, and
temporally resolved BC during different time windows before birth
(“moving averages”) with BP in newborns. Estimates represent mean
difference in SBP (95% CI) for an IQR in exposure and are adjusted for
neighborhood median income; mother's age, third-trimester BP,
educational level, and race/ethnicity; child birth weight; infant's age
at BP measurement, BP measurement conditions; and time trend. 4

ΔSBP (mmHg) per IQR increment in pollutant

longer-term cumulative exposure. For gaseous pollution, BP changes were
associated with longer-term exposures. BP is a function of cardiac
output and peripheral vascular resistance, each of which can be
influenced by a number of factors. Epidemiological and experimental
studies in adults suggest that underlying mechanisms for short-term air
pollution effects on increased BP relate to autonomic imbalance and
systemic oxidative/inflammatory responses promoting vascular endothelial
dysfunction (Brook 2005). A growing literature supported by animal
models suggests that longer-term exposures to particle pollution in
adults can lead to atherosclerosis and vascular remodeling (Pope et al.
2004; Soares et al. 2009; Sun et al. 2005). These short- and long-term
vascular responses could be applicable to the fetus as well: At least
one study has found adverse effects of antenatal air pollution (PM2.5,
CO, NO2, sulfur dioxide) on placental vascular structure in a rodent
model (Veras et al. 2008). Adjustment for the potential mediators such
as maternal BP or birth weight did not alter associations, suggesting
that air pollution may have influenced cardiac output and structure
directly through increasing placental vascular or fetal vascular
resistance and cardiac output. However, experimental studies in animals
of air pollution in pregnancy and BP in offspring are lacking, and human
inter­ventions investigating this issue may be ­difficult to perform. In
an earlier study, we reported opposing associations of particle
pollutants and O3 with BP in an adult population with diabetes after
adjustment for season and ambient temperature (Hoffmann et al. 2012). We
found that exposure to particle pollutants was associated with higher
BP, whereas exposure to O3 was associated with lower BP in the third
trimester, but with higher BP in the second trimester. In addition,
exposure to CO and NOx in the second trimester was associated with lower
BP. An earlier study reported an inverse association between nitrogen
oxides and BP in adults (Sørensen et al. 2012). Thus, particle
pollutants and gaseous pollutants may have different mechanisms
underlying the air pollution--newborn BP association. A fall in cardiac
output has been shown in mice exposed to O 3 (Lee and Pisarri 2001), but
how this phenomenon might work in utero is unknown. Alternatively, O3
was strongly inversely correlated with NO2 (r90 days average = --0.69)
and NOx (r90 days average = --0.92) in our study, which is consistent
with its chemical properties: NOx is a primary vehicular pollutant that
quenches O3. In addition, ground-level O3 is higher with higher
temperature and low wind speed. Although the association of O3 with
lower BP may be spurious due to its negative correlation with NOx and
other pollutants

4

NO2

2

2

0

0

--2

--2

--4

--4

--6 4

2

3

4

5

6

7

14

30

60

90

--6 4

CO

2

2

0

0

--2

--2

--4

--4

--6

2

3

4

5

6

7

14

30

60

90

NOx

--6

2

3

4

5

6

7

14

30

60

90

2

3

4

5

6

7

14

30

60

90

O3

Air pollution exposure averaged over the last 2 to 90 days before birth

Figure 2. Association of NO2, NOx, CO, and O3 exposure during different
time windows before birth (“moving averages”) with BP in newborns.
Estimates represent mean difference in SBP (95% CI) for an IQR in
exposure and are adjusted for neighborhood median income; mother's age,
third-trimester blood pressure, educational level, and race/ethnicity;
child birth weight; infant's age at BP measurement; and time trend.

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 123 | number 4 | April 2015

357

van Rossem et al.

other unmeasured exposures that season may represent. With the
stationary site--measured gases, we find long-term associations only
with BP. Because of this, despite our adjustment with penalized splines
for season and for year-by-season trends, we cannot rule out the
possibility that whether the trimesterspecific or 30- to 90-day average
gas (NO x or O3) associations with BP may be partly confounded by
unmeasured factors related to these 30- to 90-day periods. This is, of
course, a consideration in all studies that use trimester-specific or
90-day averaged temporally but not spatially resolved pollution, because
time periods shorter than 365 days overlap with season. Future modeling
of spatiotemporally resolved NOx in our study will help us further
disentangle season from pollution associations. This study has many
strengths including careful measures of newborn BP and information on a
number of antenatal predictors and potential confounders. Nevertheless,
some limitations exist. The precision of exposure estimates may have
been reduced by using central-site measures for many exposures of
interest. However, this was not reflected in the estimates because the
third-trimester BC associations with BP were less strong for the
spatiotemporal estimates of BC than for the temporal measures of BC. It
is possible that regional BC may better reflect exposure than
residence-specific BC, because participants may not be at home during
the day. In contrast with BC, third-trimester spatiotemporal PM2.5
estimates had larger, more precise associations with BP than did
central-site measures of PM, even though the satellite-based estimates
of PM 2.5 were based on a 10‑km, not a residence-specific, spatial
resolution. A limitation of the present study is the spatial resolution
of 10 × 10 km and the missing data for the spatio­temporal estimates of
PM2.5. However, the missing data are not likely to be associated with
the exposure and/or outcome variable and therefore probably only reduce
precision. Although we have adjusted for season, some seasonal
components may still be mixed with the effects of the 90-day and
trimesterspecific estimates of air pollutant. Included and excluded
participants differed according to maternal race and education. This
could have led to selection bias if the association between air
pollution and BP differed in those who were not in the study. Although
this is unlikely, we cannot completely rule out the possibility.
Finally, our study consisted of healthy neonates, and therefore the
results cannot be generalized to less healthy infants, including
children born preterm. Circulatory changes in the first hours and days
of life are profound; some of the cardiovascular measures at birth may
represent

358

transient responses and others may have longterm implications. Neonatal
BP may have a different meaning than BP measured later in infancy,
childhood, or adulthood. From infancy onward, children tend to maintain
their BP ranking, meaning that infants with relatively high BP are more
likely to have high BP in adulthood (Chen and Wang 2008). The literature
on the implication of neonatal BP for later cardiovascular disease or
risk of hypertension is sparse (de Swiet et al. 1980; Higgins et al.
1980; Levine et al. 1978; Schachter et al. 1979; Zinner et al. 1985). To
our knowledge there is no follow-up study that assessed the association
between neonatal BP and later cardiovascular health.

Conclusion Our study contributes unique insight into prenatal pollution
exposures and neonatal BP. In summary, we found that third-trimester
antenatal exposures to BC and, to a lesser extent, PM2.5 were associated
with higher newborn BP, whereas concentrations of O3 in the third
trimester were associated with lower BP. Future follow-up will indicate
whether these associations persist into later childhood. References
Bilenko N, van Rossem L, Brunekreef B, Beelen R, Eeftens M, Hoek G,
et al. 2015. Traffic-related air pollution and noise and children's
blood pressure: results from the PIAMA birth cohort study. Eur J Prev
Cardiol 22:4--12. Bonzini M, Carugno M, Grillo P, Mensi C, Bertazzi PA,
Pesatori AC. 2010. Impact of ambient air pollution on birth outcomes:
systematic review of the current evidences. Med Lav 101:341--363.
Bosetti C, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, Gallus S, Cipriani S, La Vecchia C,
Parazzini F. 2010. Ambient particulate matter and preterm birth or birth
weight: a review of the literature. Arch Toxicol 84:447--460. Brook RD.
2005. You are what you breathe: evidence linking air pollution and blood
pressure. Curr Hypertens Rep 7:427--434. Brook RD, Rajagopalan S. 2009.
Particulate matter, air pollution, and blood pressure. J Am Soc
Hypertens 3:332--350. Brook RD, Urch B, Dvonch JT, Bard RL, Speck M,
Keeler  G, et  al. 2009. Insights into the mechanisms and mediators of
the effects of air pollution exposure on blood pressure and vascular
function in healthy humans. Hypertension 54:659--667. Chen X, Wang Y.
2008. Tracking of blood pressure from childhood to adulthood: a
systematic review and meta-regression analysis. Circulation
117:3171--3180. de Swiet M, Fayers P, Shinebourne EA. 1980. Systolic
blood pressure in a population of infants in the first year of life: the
Brompton study. Pediatrics 65:1028--1035. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware
JH. 2011. Linear mixed effect models. In: Applied Longitudinal Analysis.
2nd Ed. New York:Wiley & Sons, 194--200. Ghosh R, Rankin J,
Pless-Mulloli T, Glinianaia S. 2007. Does the effect of air pollution on
pregnancy outcomes differ by gender? A systematic review. Environ Res
105:400--408. Gillman MW, Cook NR. 1995. Blood pressure

volume

measurement in childhood epidemiological studies. Circulation
92:1049--1057. Gillman MW, Rich-Edwards JW, Rifas-Shiman SL, Lieberman
ES, Kleinman KP, Lipshultz SE. 2004. Maternal age and other predictors
of newborn blood pressure. J Pediatr 144:240--245. Glinianaia SV, Rankin
J, Bell R, Pless-Mulloli T, Howel D. 2004. Particulate air pollution and
fetal health: a systematic review of the epidemiologic evidence.
Epidemiology 15:36--45. Gryparis A, Coull BA, Schwartz J, Suh HH. 2007.
Semiparametric latent variable regression models for spatiotemporal
modelling of mobile source particles in the greater Boston area. J R
Stat Soc Ser C Appl Stat 56:183--209. Hampel R, Lepeule J, Schneider A,
Bottagisi S, Charles MA, Ducimetière P, et al. 2011. Short-term impact
of ambient air pollution and air temperature on blood pressure among
pregnant women. Epidemiology 22(5):671--679. Higgins M, Keller J, Moore
F, Ostrander L, Metzner H, Stock L. 1980. Studies of blood pressure in
Tecumseh, Michigan. I. Blood pressure in young people and its
relationship to personal and familial characteristics and complications
of pregnancy in mothers. Am J Epidemiol 111:142--155. Hoffmann B,
Luttmann-Gibson H, Cohen A, Zanobetti A, de Souza C, Foley C, et al.
2012. Opposing effects of particle pollution, ozone, and ambient
temperature on arterial blood pressure. Environ Health Perspect
120:241--246; doi:10.1289/ehp.1103647. Huxley RR, Shiell AW, Law CM.
2000. The role of size at birth and postnatal catch-up growth in
determining systolic blood pressure: a systematic review of the
literature. J Hypertens 18:815--831. Kang CM, Koutrakis P, Suh HH. 2010.
Hourly measurements of fine particulate sulfate and carbon aerosols at
the Harvard--U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Supersite in Boston. J
Air Waste Manag Assoc 60:1327--1334. Kent AL, Shadbolt B, Hu E, Meskell
S, Falk MC, Dahlstrom JE. 2009. Do maternal- or pregnancyassociated
disease states affect blood pressure in the early neonatal period? Aust
NZ J Obstet Gynaecol 49:364--370. Kloog I, Melly SJ, Ridgway WL, Coull
BA, Schwartz J. 2012. Using new satellite based exposure methods to
study the association between pregnancy PM2.5 exposure, premature birth
and birth weight in Massachusetts. Environ Health 11:40;
doi:10.1186/1476-069X-11-40. Laird NM, Ware JH. 1982. Random-effects
models for longitudinal data. Biometrics 38:963--974. Lee LY, Pisarri
TE. 2001. Afferent properties and reflex functions of bronchopulmonary
C-fibers. Respir Physiol 125:47--65. Levine RS, Hennekens CH, Klein B,
Gourley J, Briese  FW, Hokanson J, et  al. 1978. Tracking correlations
of blood pressure levels in infancy. Pediatrics 61:121--125. Maisonet M,
Correa A, Misra D, Jaakkola JJ. 2004. A review of the literature on the
effects of ambient air pollution on fetal growth. Environ Res
95:106--115. Mordukhovich I, Wilker E, Suh H, Wright R, Sparrow D,
Vokonas PS, et al. 2009. Black carbon exposure, oxidative stress genes,
and blood pressure in a repeated-measures study. Environ Health Perspect
117:1767--1772; doi:10.1289/ehp.0900591. Morrison KM, Anand SS, Yusuf S,
Atkinson SA, Schulze KM, Rao-Melacini P, et al. 2013. Maternal and
pregnancy related predictors of cardiometabolic traits in newborns. PLoS
One 8:e55815; doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0055815. Pope CA III, Burnett RT,
Thurston GD, Thun MJ, Calle EE, Krewski D, et al. 2004. Cardiovascular

123 | number 4 | April 2015  •  Environmental Health Perspectives

Air pollution and newborn BP

mortality and long-term exposure to particulate air pollution:
epidemiological evidence of general pathophysiological pathways of
disease. Circulation 109:71--77. Schachter J, Kuller LH, Perkins JM,
Radin ME. 1979. Infant blood pressure and heart rate: relation to ethnic
group (black or white), nutrition and electrolyte intake. Am J Epidemiol
110:205--218. Selevan SG, Kimmel CA, Mendola P. 2000. Identifying
critical windows of exposure for children's health. Environ Health
Perspect 108(suppl 3):451--455. Shah PS, Balkhair T, Knowledge Synthesis
Group on Determinants of Preterm/LBW Births. 2011. Air pollution and
birth outcomes: a systematic review. Environ Int 37:498--516. Simonetti
GD, Schwertz R, Klett M, Hoffmann  GF, Schaefer F, Wühl E. 2011.
Determinants of blood pressure in preschool children: the role of
parental smoking. Circulation 123:292--298. Soares SR, Carvalho-Oliveira
R, Ramos-Sanchez E, Catanozi S, da Silva LF, Mauad T, et al. 2009. Air
pollution and antibodies against modified lipoproteins are associated
with atherosclerosis

and vascular remodeling in hyperlipemic mice. Atherosclerosis
207:368--373. Sørensen M, Hoffmann B, Hvidberg M, Ketzel M, Jensen SS,
Andersen ZJ, et al. 2012. Long-term exposure to traffic-related air
pollution associated with blood pressure and self-reported hypertension
in a Danish cohort. Environ Health Perspect 120:418--424;
doi:10.1289/ehp.1103631. Srám RJ, Binková B, Dejmek J, Bobak M. 2005.
Ambient air pollution and pregnancy outcomes: a review of the
literature. Environ Health Perspect 113:375--382; doi:10.1289/ehp.6362.
Stillerman KP, Mattison DR, Giudice LC, Woodruff TJ. 2008. Environmental
exposures and adverse pregnancy outcomes: a review of the science.
Reprod Sci 15:631--650. Sughis M, Nawrot TS, Ihsan-ul-Haque S, Amjad  A,
Nemery  B. 2012. Blood pressure and particulate air pollution in
schoolchildren of Lahore, Pakistan. BMC Public Health 12:378;
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-12-378. Sun Q, Wang A, Jin X, Natanzon A, Duquaine
D, Brook  RD, et  al. 2005. Long-term air pollution

Environmental Health Perspectives  •  volume 123 | number 4 | April 2015

exposure and acceleration of atherosclerosis and vascular inflammation
in an animal model. JAMA 294:3003--3010. van  den  Hooven EH, de
Kluizenaar Y, Pierik FH, Hofman A, van Ratingen SW, Zandveld PY, et al.
2011. Air pollution, blood pressure, and the risk of hypertensive
complications during pregnancy: the generation R study. Hypertension
57:406--412. Veras MM, Damaceno-Rodrigues NR, Caldini EG,
Maciel Ribeiro AA, Mayhew TM, Saldiva PH, et al. 2008. Particulate urban
air pollution affects the functional morphology of mouse placenta. Biol
Reprod 79:578--584. Zanobetti A, Coull BA, Gryparis A, Kloog I,
Sparrow D, Vokonas PS, et al. 2014. Associations between arrhythmia
episodes and temporally and spatially resolved black carbon and
particulate matter in elderly patients. Occup Environ Med 71:201--207.
Zinner SH, Rosner B, Oh W, Kass EH. 1985. Significance of blood pressure
in infancy. Familial aggregation and predictive effect on later blood
pressure. Hypertension 7:411--416.

359


