Hindawi Publishing Corporation Parkinson's Disease Volume 2015, Article
ID 576564, 7 pages http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/576564

Research Article Parkinson's Disease Prevalence and Proximity to
Agricultural Cultivated Fields Maayan Yitshak Sade,1,2 Yair Zlotnik,2,3
Itai Kloog,4 Victor Novack,1,2 Chava Peretz,5 and Gal Ifergane2,3 1

Clinical Research Center, Soroka University Medical Center, 84101 Beer
Sheva, Israel Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University, 84101
Beer Sheva, Israel 3 Department of Neurology, Soroka University Medical
Center, 84101 Beer Sheva, Israel 4 Department of Geography and
Environmental Development, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences,
Ben Gurion University, 84101 Beer Sheva, Israel 5 Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, School of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology, Tel Aviv
University, 6997801 Tel Aviv, Israel 2

Correspondence should be addressed to Gal Ifergane; galif@clalit.org.il
Received 23 May 2015; Revised 13 July 2015; Accepted 27 July 2015
Academic Editor: Peter Hagell Copyright © 2015 Maayan Yitshak Sade et
al. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work
is properly cited. The risk for developing Parkinson's disease (PD) is a
combination of multiple environmental and genetic factors. The Negev
(Southern Israel) contains approximately 252.5 km2 of agricultural
cultivated fields (ACF). We aimed to estimate the prevalence and
incidence of PD and to examine possible geographical clustering and
associations with agricultural exposures. We screened all “Clalit”
Health Services members in the Negev (70% of the population) between the
years 2000 and 2012. Individual demographic, clinical, and medication
prescription data were available. We used a refined medication tracer
algorithm to identify PD patients. We used mixed Poisson models to
calculate the smoothed standardized incidence rates (SIRs) for each
locality. We identified ACF and calculate the size and distance of the
fields from each locality. We identified 3,792 cases of PD. SIRs were
higher than expected in Jewish rural localities (median SIR [95% CI]:
1.41 [1.28; 1.53] in 2001--2004, 1.62 [1.48; 1.76] in 2005--2008, and
1.57 [1.44; 1.80] in 2009--2012). Highest SIR was observed in localities
located in proximity to large ACF (SIR 1.54, 95% CI 1.32; 1.79). In
conclusion, in this population based study we found that PD SIRs were
higher than expected in rural localities. Furthermore, it appears that
proximity to ACF and the field size contribute to PD risk.

1. Introduction Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative
   disease characterized by dopaminergic neuron loss. The risk for
   developing PD is a combination of multiple environmental and genetic
   factors, and the exact etiology is still unknown [1]. An estimated
   prevalence and incidence of PD in Israel have been recently assessed
   using an algorithm based on computerized drug purchase data [2]. A
   number of studies found PD geographic clustering suggesting a common
   environmental factor [3, 4]. Exposure to environmental factors such
   as living in a rural area, well water use, exposure to pesticides,
   and heavy metals may serve as a risk factor for developing PD [5]. In
   Israel, clustering

of PD patients in agricultural settlements was reported two decades ago
[6]. Evidence on the association of pesticides exposure and PD
development is controversial [7--11]. In a series of studies, a group of
researchers from California found positive associations of pesticides
exposure and PD [12--15]; Wang and colleagues, for instance, found
higher risk for PD (OR 1.86, 95% CI 1.09; 3.18), associated with
combined exposure to ziram, maneb, and paraquat [15]. Other studies
found no evidence for pesticides as a risk factor of PD [8, 11].
Consequently, Li et al., in their review, concluded that the current
epidemiologic data cannot provide evidence that supports a causal
association between pesticide exposure and PD [16]. Furthermore, since
PD develops after years

2 of exposures to variety of chemicals, the identification of a
specific neurotoxic chemical is extremely difficult [17]. As of 2014,
there is no PD registry for the Negev. The present study is based on the
prescription database of the largest Health Maintenance Organization
(HMO) in Israel--- Clalit Healthcare Services. Our aims were to estimate
the prevalence and incidence of PD in the Negev population over the past
decade and to examine possible geographical clustering of PD patients in
the Negev, in conjunction with agricultural exposures.

2. Methods 2.1. Source Population. We screened all Clalit Health
   Services (CHS) Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) members in the
   Negev between the years 2000 and 2012. Approximately 70% of the
   residents in the Negev are insured by CHS, which owns the only
   hospital providing neurological care in the region. The remaining 30%
   of the residents are insured by one of the other three HMOs. Except
   for higher mean age of the CHS members, the characteristics of all
   HMO members are similar [18]. This unique setup of the medical system
   allows us to reduce the potential bias in outcome definition and to
   include a wide range of the population. 2.2. CHS Database. Individual
   demographic, clinical, laboratory, and medication prescription data
   of CHS members are fully computerized and were available for our
   study period. The medication database contains the purchase date, the
   brand and generic name of the purchased medication, the dose
   schedule, and the dose dispensed. 2.3. PD Assessment. To identify PD
   patients, we used a refined medication tracer algorithm previously
   developed and validated by Chillag-Talmor et al. [2]. In brief, we
   identified all CHS members who purchased at least one of the
   following anti-Parkinsonian drugs (APD) in the study period: levodopa
   and levodopa derivatives, amantadine derivatives, dopamine agonists,
   monoamine oxidase (MAO) B inhibitors, or other dopaminergic agents.
   Subjects younger than 20 years or older than 84 years of age at first
   recorded purchase were excluded. We defined PD at three levels of
   accuracy: definite, probable, and possible based on the follow-up
   time, the purchase intensity, the combination of drugs purchased, and
   the age at first recorded purchase [2]. 2.4. Study Population. The
   Negev comprises over 55% of the country of Israel's landmass.
   Approximately 252.5 km2 of the land in the Negev is agricultural crop
   areas, containing mostly field crops [19]. As of 2011, it is home to
   some 1,121,600 people (or 8.2% of Israel's population), of whom 20%
   are Bedouin Arabs. The Jewish population in the Negev is older, with
   a median age of 31 years compared to median age of 15 years among the
   Bedouin population [20]. Localities were identified as Jewish or
   Bedouin and as rural or urban based on the definitions of the Central
   Bureau of Statistics [21]. The majority of the Jewish population
   resides in cities and about 10% resides in rural localities [20].
   Bedouins are in transition period from a seminomad

Parkinson's Disease to a stationary life style with approximately 40%
living in unrecognized temporary localities [22]. They live in shacks or
tents without access to municipal infrastructure such as running water,
sewage treatment, or garbage disposal. These localities are not formally
registered in the Central Bauru of Statistics databases and therefore
are not represented in the map. 2.5. Land Use Data. The spatial
resolution used in the study corresponds to the center of each locality
in Southern Israel and was linked to each subject place of residence. We
used the Central Bureau of Statistics database of land use in Israel to
identify ACF. Data was gathered from several government offices and
private sectors to define types of land use in Israel (e.g., cultivated
fields, open space, residence, and industry) [23, 24]. 2.6. Statistical
Analysis. Results are presented in summary tables where normally
distributed continuous variables are presented as mean ± SD (standard
deviation); not normally distributed continuous variables are presented
as medians with minimal and maximal values; and categorical variables
are presented as proportions of nonmissing values. 2.7. PD Morbidity
Rates 2.7.1. Incidence and Prevalence. For the calculation of all the PD
rates, PD cases included definite, probable, and possible cases.
Incidence cases were defined based on first purchase of APD. Prevalence
cases were subjects that purchased APD during the year. Incidence and
prevalence rates were calculated from the year 2001 to exclude those who
may have been treated prior to study initiation. For the calculation of
these rates, we used the total number of CHS members in the appropriate
age and gender category (>20 years of age). 2.7.2. Standardized
Incidence Rate (SIR). To address the large random component that may
affect disease rates across small areas [25], we used a mixed Poisson
model to calculate the smoothed SIR for each locality [26]. Observed
cases were incidence cases in each locality. Due to low incidence rates
in the rural localities, annual cases were aggregated into three
segments of four to five years for the SIR calculations. Expected cases
were the number of patients expected in each locality given the total
incidence rate in the Negev and the total adult (>20 years of age)
population in each locality. Models were adjusted for the percent of
elderly (>65 years) and the percent of males in each locality [27]. 2.8.
SIR and ACF Characteristics. To assess the variation in incidence rates
with respect to the ACF characteristics located in proximity to each
locality, we choose two methods of analysis: (1) we assessed the
correlation between the distance from the ACF and the SIR using Spearman
test; (2) we assessed the ACF area in the locality surroundings. We used
ArcInfo 10.2 to calculate the size of each field and the distance of the
fields from each locality. ACF area was calculated in squared
kilometers. To define proximity, we set a threshold of 100 meters to
allow the inclusion of sufficient area of ACF on one hand and to limit
the distance from the locality and

Parkinson's Disease

3

Table 1: Population characteristics.

250

Married Divorced Widow

73.6 (20.11; 84.48)

All cases, incidence All cases, prevalence

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

6.15 (198) 79.21 (2,552) 4.81 (155) 9.84 (317)

2007

0

Age at diagnosis Median (min; max)

50

2006

Family status, % (𝑛) Single

100

2005

Male gender, % (𝑛)

150

2004

Probable Possible

58.83 (2,231) 17.06 (647) 24.10 (914) 51.71 (1,961)

2003

Definite

200

2002

Parkinson's disease, % (𝑛)

2001

𝑁 = 3792

Rates per 100,000

Population characteristics

Year Definite cases, prevalence Definite cases, incidence

Figure 1: The figure shows the prevalence and incidence rates per
100,000 by year, between the years 2001 and 2012. Prevalence and
incidence rates are presented for all cases and definite cases
separately.

Type of locality, % (𝑛) Jewish city (14 localities) Jewish rural
agricultural locality (114 localities) Bedouin Arab permanent locality
(7 localities) Bedouin Arab temporary settlement (4 localities)

84.70 (3,212) 12.53 (475) 2.45 (93) 0.32 (12)

therefore reduce the exposure misclassification error as much as
possible on the other hand. Localities with no ACF within 100 meters
were considered as a reference group, and all other localities were
divided into four groups by quartiles. We used Mann-Whitney and
Kruskal-Wallis tests for the comparison of PD morbidity rates by gender,
by the type of locality, and by the amount of ACF area located in
proximity to the locality. The study was approved by the SUMC IRB
committee. Analyses were performed in SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary,
NC, USA).

3. Results We identified 3,792 cases of PD, of whom 2,231(58.83%) were
   definite, 647 (17.06%) were probable, and 914 (24.10%) were possible
   cases. The median age at diagnosis was 73.6 years and 51.7% of the
   subjects were males (Table 1). The patients reside in 139 localities
   in the Negev area: 14 Jewish cities (84.7% of the patients), 114
   rural Jewish localities (12.5% of the patients), 7 Bedouin permanent
   localities (2.45% of the patients), and 4 Bedouin temporary
   settlements (0.35% of the patients) (Table 1). PD incidence rate
   ranged between 7.8 and 13.8 cases per 100,000 adults younger than 65
   years and between 132.5 and 197.9 cases per 100,000 adults aged 65
   years or older, in the years 2001--2012. Annual incidence and
   prevalence rates were higher among men, mostly in older patients
   (Table 2). Prevalence rate has increased over the years, while
   incidence rate remained constant (Figure 1).

We compared patients' characteristics to identify potential confounders
that differ significantly by the type of locality. We found that PD
residents in Bedouin permanent localities were significantly younger and
that the percent of males in these localities was lower (Table 3).
Figure 2 shows a significant variation in SIR between different
localities in the Negev. Median rates were higher than expected in
Jewish rural localities, where the median values (and 95% CI) ranged
between 1.41 (1.28; 1.53) and 1.62 (1.48--1.76). Among Bedouin
localities, both temporary and permanent, SIR was lower than expected
(Table 3). Given the higher SIR observed among rural Jewish localities,
we examined the association between the SIR value and the
characteristics of the ACF located in proximity to these localities. We
found a significant negative correlation between the SIR value and the
distance from the nearest ACF (𝑟 = −0.35, 𝑃 < 0.001). The quartiles of
the ACF area within 100 meters from the localities were as follows: 𝑄1 :
130 km2 , 𝑄2 : 636 km2 ; and 𝑄3 : 1,612 km2 . When stratifying Jewish
rural localities by the quartiles of ACF area in the locality
surroundings, we observed higher SIR values (𝑃 < 0.01) in localities
located in proximity to large ACF (median SIR [95% CI]): 1.37 [1.16;
1.62] in localities with no ACF within 100 meters; 1.41 [1.10; 2.20] in
localities with less than 130 km2 within 100 meters; and 1.54 [1.32;
1.79] in localities with more than 130 km2 of ACF within 100 meters.
Estimates of the localities with more than 130 km2 (the 1st quartile)
were similar and were therefore combined into one category.

4. Discussion In this population based study we found that PD morbidity
   rates were higher than expected in Jewish rural localities compared
   to Bedouin localities and Jewish cities. Furthermore, we observed
   higher SIR values in Jewish localities located in proximity to large
   agricultural cultivated fields. It

4

Parkinson's Disease Table 2: Annual prevalent and incident PD cases by
gender, 2001--2012.

Year

Incidence rate per 100,000 adults Men

Women

Prevalence rate per 100,000 adults Total

Men

Women

Total

10.0 8.0 13.8 9.0 12.3 11.6 9.1 10.6 12.7 9.5 7.9 7.8

47.1 46.9 57.4 58.4 60.6 63.8 67.0 70.7 77.7 79.1 81.7 85.3

28.4 33.0 41.7 48.0 55.6 59.4 61.6 63.0 66.3 66.8 64.7 62.0

37.4 39.7 49.3 53.0 58.0 61.6 64.2 66.8 71.8 72.8 73.0 73.4

185.5 176.8 197.9 183.6 159.6 165.5 168.2 183.3 160.6 140.8 132.5 158.2

1054.8 1002.7 1115.5 1136.5 1162.9 1186.8 1257.5 1300.1 1271.5 1279.2
1231.6 1232.3

740.9 774.0 807.6 826.8 865.4 878.7 880.4 897.2 910.2 926.1 860.3 846.8

873.8 870.8 937.9 957.2 990.7 1008.4 1039.6 1067.6 1063.6 1076.7 1019.3
1012.0

Age < 65 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

12.3 7.2 13.2 6.2 11.2 9.9 9.7 10.3 13.0 10.69 9.78 10.3

7.9 8.9 14.2 11.6 13.3 13.2 8.5 10.8 12.3 8.3 6.3 6.5

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

209.9 190.7 261.7 229.3 184.4 212.3 231.3 213.0 207.1 172.3 162.8 193.5

167.7 166.5 151.0 150.3 141.5 131.2 122.2 161.5 126.2 117.5 109.9 131.7

Age ≥ 65

This table shows the annual incidence and prevalence rates. Total rates
and rates stratified by age and gender are presented per 100,000 people
between the ages 25 and 85 in Southern Israel. Prevalence cases were
subjects that purchased APD during the year. Incidence cases for each
year were assigned based on first purchase.

Table 3: Age and gender adjusted standardized incidence rates (SIRs) of
Parkinson's disease and population characteristics, by the type of
locality. Type of locality 𝑃 value Bedouin, temporary (𝑛 = 4) Bedouin,
permanent (𝑛 = 7) Jewish, rural (𝑛 = 114) Jewish, city (𝑛 = 14) PD
accuracy, % (𝑛) Definite Probable Possible Total ∗ SIR Median (95% CI∗∗∗
) 2001--2004 2005--2008 2009--2012 ∗∗ Male gender, % (𝑛) ∗ Age at
diagnosis Median (min; max) ∗

50 (6) 8.33 (1) 41.66 (5) 100 (12)

33.33 (31) 9.68 (9) 56.99 (53) 100 (93)

62.74 (298) 15.16 (72) 22.11 (105) 100 (475)

59 (1,896) 17.6 (565) 23.4 (751) 100 (3,212)

--- 0.46 (0.36; 0.55) 0.47 (0.38; 0.62) 50 (6)

0.28 (0.21; 0.30) 0.27 (0.22; 0.31) 0.29 (0.23; 0.33) 42 (39)

1.41 (1.28; 1.53) 1.62 (1.48; 1.76) 1.57 (1.44; 1.80) 48.42 (230)

1.02 (0.87; 1.16) 1.01 (0.85; 1.17) 1.04 (0.89; 1.20) 52.5 (1,686)

<0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.093

70.8 (55.6; 76.8)

58.5 (20.9; 84.1)

71.7 (21.3; 84.5)

74 (20.11; 84.48)

<0.001

𝑃 values were obtained from Kruskal-Wallis test. ∗∗ 𝑃 values were
obtained from chi-square test. ∗∗∗ 95% confidence intervals calculated
as distribution-free confidence limits.

Parkinson's Disease

0

SMR 0.22--1.00 1.01--2.00

12.5

5

(km) 25

50

2.01--3.84 Cultivated fields

Figure 2: The figure shows the age and gender adjusted standardized
incidence rates (SIRs) of Parkinson's disease in localities in Southern
Israel. The full lines represent the borders of the southern district in
Israel. The graduated symbols represent the SIR in each locality.
Agricultural cultivated fields are highlighted in the map.

appears that proximity to agricultural cultivated fields and the field
size contribute to PD risk. Numerous studies have tried to address the
contribution of possible risk factors such as farming, pesticides
exposure, living in rural areas, and well water drinking, to PD
epidemiology. Similar to our study, the absence of validated exposure
assessment is a potential source of bias in most studies [1]. In our
study, however, we were able to map the CHS insured PD patients in the
entire Negev area and to estimate PD morbidity rates with respect to
size of the near ACF, providing another angle of evidence for
environmental risk factors for developing PD. A major strength of this
study is the completeness and accuracy of medical and pharmacy data
allowed us to perform a large scale epidemiological study. Pharmacy
purchase databases are a highly valid source of drug utilization in

populations with a universal drug benefit. They are very accurate and
closely monitored, since they are maintained for administrative
purposes. Thus, pharmacy databases enable observational studies of large
populations with long followup, reduced selection bias, and increased
generalizability [28, 29]. In this study, we used a unique drug tracer
algorithm for PD assessment, recently published by Chillag-Talmor et
al., which demonstrated a very high sensitivity (96%) and a reasonable
rate of false identification of other movement disorders as PD [2]. We
chose to base our data on the prescription database of CHS, as it is the
largest HMO in Israel, which insures approximately 70% of the population
of 730,000 residents in the Negev. Similar to a former study conducted
in Israel, incidence rates remained stable across the study period and
prevalence rates had increased over time [2]. The increase in prevalence
rate can be explained by a combination of factors: the long duration of
PD; general increase in longevity; and possible improvement in medical
care expressed in actual increase in disease duration. Our study
strengthens the evidence for an increment of PD prevalence, and this
finding may have a major impact on medical policy. Incidence and
prevalence rates observed in our study are similar to a previous study
conducted in Israel [2], but rather high compared to other countries. In
previous reports in other developed countries, rate ranges were
60--350/100,000 for prevalence and 5--26/100,000 for incidence [30--34].
Our SIRs for different localities offer a demonstrative example of the
interplay between genetics/ethnicity and environment in PD epidemiology:
overall, the median rates were higher in Jewish localities compared to
Bedouin. PD prevalence rates among Arabs (∼10% of Israel's population >
50 years) were also suggested to be lower compared to Jews in former
studies [35], while on the other hand among Ashkenazi Jews rates may be
higher, due to the high frequency of PD-associated mutations in LRRK2
(G2019S) and GBA genes among this population in Israel [36, 37].
However, SIRs were higher in both Jews and Bedouins living in rural
localities compared to urban people of the same ethnicity, providing
further evidence for environmental risk factors for developing PD. Our
study had a few limitations. First, we did not have data regarding the
residential history of the patients or the characteristics of the ACS
located in proximity to the localities (i.e., pesticides use, type of
crops), which may have resulted in exposure misclassification. However,
since the study population comprises mostly elderly people, we believe
it is safe to assume that most patients did not change their place of
residence in the recent decades. Second, we did not have data on the
patients' origin and therefore we were not able to properly identify
Ashkenazi Jewish origin, a known genetic risk factor for PD. Third,
patients who were not insured by Clalit HMO were not included in our
analysis. Despite that, because Clalit insures the majority of the Negev
population, we believe that our study population is representative of
the total population in the Negev. In addition, Bedouin or Jewish origin
was assigned based on the place of residence. Lastly, since we
identified PD patients based on medications purchase, our definition may
be affected by

6 population behavior and compliance to treatment. Given that
limitation, we address the morbidity rates found in the Bedouin
population (characterized with low SES and low compliance for treatment)
with caution. In conclusion, our data serves as a demonstrative example
and provides further evidence for the interplay between ethnicity and
environmental factors contributing to PD epidemiology. Rural areas and
proximity to large ACF seem to play a role in PD according to our
approach of stratification, and further studies are warranted in order
to further elucidate this issue.

Parkinson's Disease

[12]

[13]

[14]

Conflict of Interests The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interests regarding the publication of this paper.

References [1] E. Dardiotis, G. Xiromerisiou, C. Hadjichristodoulou, A.
M. Tsatsakis, M. F. Wilks, and G. M. Hadjigeorgiou, “The interplay
between environmental and genetic factors in Parkinson's disease
susceptibility: the evidence for pesticides,” Toxicology, vol. 307, pp.
17--23, 2013. [2] O. Chillag-Talmor, N. Giladi, S. Linn et al., “Use of
a refined drug tracer algorithm to estimate prevalence and incidence of
Parkinson's disease in a large Israeli population,” Journal of
Parkinson's Disease, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 35--47, 2011. [3] J. D.
Pedro-Cuesta, E. Rodrı́guez-Farré, and G. Lopez-Abente, “Spatial
distribution of Parkinson's disease mortality in Spain, 1989--1998, as a
guide for focused aetiological research or healthcare intervention,” BMC
Public Health, vol. 9, article 445, 2009. [4] A. Wright Willis, B. A.
Evanoff, M. Lian, S. R. Criswell, and B. A. Racette, “Geographic and
ethnic variation in Parkinson disease: a population-based study of us
medicare beneficiaries,” Neuroepidemiology, vol. 34, no. 3, pp.
143--151, 2010. [5] A. Priyadarshi, S. A. Khuder, E. A. Schaub, and S.
S. Priyadarshi, “Environmental risk factors and Parkinson's disease: a
metaanalysis,” Environmental Research, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 122--127,
2001. [6] Y. O. Herishanu, J. R. Goldsmith, J. M. Abarbanel, and Z.
Weinbaum, “Clustering of Parkinson's disease in southern Israel,”
Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 402--405,
1989. [7] A. Ascherio, H. Chen, M. G. Weisskopf et al., “Pesticide
exposure and risk for Parkinson's disease,” Annals of Neurology, vol.
60, no. 2, pp. 197--203, 2006. [8] M. Behari, A. K. Srivastava, R. R.
Das, and R. M. Pandey, “Risk factors of Parkinson's disease in Indian
patients,” Journal of the Neurological Sciences, vol. 190, no. 1-2, pp.
49--55, 2001. [9] R. Frigerio, K. R. Sanft, B. R. Grossardt et al.,
“Chemical exposures and Parkinson's disease: a population-based
case-control study,” Movement Disorders, vol. 21, no. 10, pp.
1688--1692, 2006. [10] K. Kanavouras, M. N. Tzatzarakis, V.
Mastorodemos, A. Plaitakis, and A. M. Tsatsakis, “A case report of motor
neuron disease in a patient showing significant level of DDTs, HCHs and
organophosphate metabolites in hair as well as levels of hexane and
toluene in blood,” Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, vol. 256, no. 3,
pp. 399--404, 2011. [11] A. Nuti, R. Ceravolo, G. Dell'Agnello et al.,
“Environmental factors and Parkinson's disease: a case-control study in
the

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18][19] [20][21] [22][23] [24][25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

Tuscany region of Italy,” Parkinsonism & Related Disorders, vol. 10, no.
8, pp. 481--485, 2004. S. Costello, M. Cockburn, J. Bronstein, X. Zhang,
and B. Ritz, “Parkinson's disease and residential exposure to maneb and
paraquat from agricultural applications in the central valley of
California,” American Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 169, no. 8, pp.
919--926, 2009. N. M. Gatto, S. L. Rhodes, A. D. Manthripragada et al.,
“Alphasynuclein gene may interact with environmental factors in
increasing risk of Parkinson's disease,” Neuroepidemiology, vol. 35, no.
3, pp. 191--195, 2010. B. Ritz and F. Yu, “Parkinson's disease mortality
and pesticide exposure in California 1984--1994,” International Journal
of Epidemiology, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 323--329, 2000. A. Wang, S.
Costello, M. Cockburn, X. B. Zhang, J. Bronstein, and B. Ritz,
“Parkinson's disease risk from ambient exposure to pesticides,” European
Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 547--555, 2011. A. A. Li,
P. J. Mink, L. J. McIntosh, M. J. Teta, and B. Finley, “Evaluation of
epidemiologic and animal data associating pesticides with Parkinson's
disease,” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, vol. 47,
no. 10, pp. 1059--1087, 2005. A. Chorfa, C. Lazizzera, D. Bétemps et
al., “A variety of pesticides trigger in vitro 𝛼-synuclein accumulation,
a key event in Parkinson's disease,” Archives of Toxicology, 2014. NIIO
Israel, “HMO membership,” 2012. Central Bureau of Statistics,
Agricultural Crop Area, by Regional Council, 2014. Central Bureau of
Statistics, Population by Population Group, Religion, Age, Sex and Type
of Locality, 2011. Central Bureau of Statistics, Localities in Israel,
Central Bureau of Statistics, 2013, (Hebrew). Central Bureau of
Statistics, Population by District, Sub-District and Religion, Central
Bureau of Statistics, 2011. Central Bureau of Statistics, Land Use in
Israel 2004, Central Bureau of Statistics, 2004 (Hebrew). Central Bureau
of Statistics, Land Use in Israel, Central Bureau of Statistics, 2002,
(Hebrew). P. Elliott and D. Wartenberg, “Spatial epidemiology: current
approaches and future challenges,” Environmental Health Perspectives,
vol. 112, no. 9, pp. 998--1006, 2004. N. E. Breslow and D. G. Clayton,
“Aproximate inference in generalized linear mixed models,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, vol. 88, no. 421, pp. 9--25, 1993.
M. A. Hely, W. G. J. Reid, M. A. Adena, G. M. Halliday, and J. G. L.
Morris, “The Sydney multicenter study of Parkinson's disease: the
inevitability of dementia at 20 years,” Movement Disorders, vol. 23, no.
6, pp. 837--844, 2008. N. R. Szumski and E. M. Cheng, “Optimizing
algorithms to identify Parkinson's disease cases within an
administrative database,” Movement Disorders, vol. 24, no. 1, pp.
51--56, 2009. D. A. M. C. van de Vijver, R. A. C. Roos, P. A. F. Jansen,
A. J. Porsius, and A. de Boer, “Estimation of incidence and prevalence
of Parkinson's disease in the elderly using pharmacy records,”
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 549--554,
2001. H. Checkoway and L. M. Nelson, “Epidemiologic approaches to the
study of Parkinson's disease etiology,” Epidemiology, vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 327--336, 1999. L. M. de Lau and M. M. Breteler, “Epidemiology of
Parkinson's disease,” The Lancet Neurology, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 525--535,
2006.

Parkinson's Disease [32] D. Twelves, K. S. M. Perkins, and C. Counsell,
“Systematic review of incidence studies of Parkinson's disease,”
Movement Disorders, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 19--31, 2003. [33] S. von
Campenhausen, B. Bornschein, R. Wick et al., “Prevalence and incidence
of Parkinson's disease in Europe,” European Neuropsychopharmacology,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 473--490, 2005. [34] Z.-X. Zhang and G. C. Roman,
“Worldwide occurrence of Parkinson's disease: an updated review,”
Neuroepidemiology, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 195--208, 1993. [35] R. Masalha,
E. Kordysh, G. Alpert et al., “The prevalence of Parkinson's disease in
an Arab population, Wadi Ara, Israel,” Israel Medical Association
Journal, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 32--35, 2010. [36] A. Orr-Urtreger, C.
Shifrin, U. Rozovski et al., “The LRRK2 G2019S mutation in Ashkenazi
Jews with Parkinson disease: is there a gender effect?” Neurology, vol.
69, no. 16, pp. 1595--1602, 2007. [37] E. Sidransky, M. A. Nalls, J. O.
Aasly et al., “Multicenter analysis of glucocerebrosidase mutations in
Parkinson's disease,” The New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 361, no.
17, pp. 1651--1661, 2009.

7


