Air Pollution and Ischemic Stroke Among Young Adults Maayan Yitshak
Sade, MPH; Victor Novack, MD, PhD; Gal Ifergane, MD; Anat Horev, MD;
Itai Kloog, PhD Background and Purpose---Studies have demonstrated
consistent associations between cardiovascular illness and particulate
matter (PM) <10 and <2.5 μm in diameter, but stroke received less
attention. We hypothesized that air pollution, an inflammation
progenitor, can be associated with stroke incidence in young patients in
whom the usual risk factors for stroke are less prevalent. We aimed to
evaluate the association between stroke incidence and exposure to PM <10
and <2.5 μm, in a desert area characterized by a wide range of PM.
Methods---We included all members of the largest health maintenance
organization in Israel, who were admitted to a local hospital with
stroke between 2005 and 2012. Exposure assessment was based on a hybrid
model incorporating daily satellite remote sensing data at 1-km spatial
resolution. We performed case-crossover analysis, stratified by personal
characteristics and distance from main roads. Results---We identified
4837 stroke cases (89.4% ischemic stroke). Interquartile range of PM <10
and <2.5 μm was 36.3 to 54.7 and 16.7 to 23.3 μg/m3, respectively. The
subjects' average age was 70 years; 53.4% were males. Associations
between ischemic stroke and increases of interquartile range average
concentrations of particulate matter <10 or <2.5 μm at the day of the
event were observed among subjects <55 years (odds ratio [95% confidence
interval], 1.11 [1.02--1.20] and 1.10 [1.00--1.21]). Stronger
associations were observed in subjects living within 75 m from a main
road (1.22 ­[1.03--1.43] and 1.26 [1.04--1.51]). Conclusions---We
observed higher risk for ischemic stroke associated with PM among young
adults. This finding can be explained by the inflammatory mechanism,
linking air pollution and stroke.   (Stroke. 2015;46:3348-3353. DOI:
10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.010992.) Key Words: air pollution ◼ inflammation ◼
particulate matter ◼ risk factor ◼ stroke

E

pidemiological studies have demonstrated a consistent increased risk for
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality after exposure to air
pollution.1--4 Stroke, a common cause of death and severe chronic
disability,5 has received less attention.6 Of the studies that examined
the association between particulate matter <10 μm in diameter (PM10) or
<2.5 μm in diameter (PM2.5) and stroke, several have found positive
associations5,7--13 predominantly with incidence of the ischemic
stroke.3,6,8,10,13 Other studies did not find associations between PM
and stroke risk.14,15 A major limitation of most studies is the exposure
assessment that was based mostly on monitoring stations, a method that
could have potentially lead to some inaccuracy and biased results.16,17
We have recently presented a new method of assessing spatiotemporal
resolved PM2.5 and PM10 exposures18,19 in the Negev (South Israel)--- a
semi-arid area, located in the global dust belt, which extends from West
Africa to the Arabian Desert.20 Unlike many commonly used exposure
models, our model makes use of satellite aerosol optical depth
measurements, which allowed us to estimate daily, spatially resolved,

PM10 and PM2.5 concentration with the inclusion of populations in rural
areas not living nearby monitoring stations. Stroke in older patients is
mostly related to atherosclerosis.21 In the young, however, stroke is
less common, and the cause is much more diverse and often unexplained.21
We hypothesize that PM exposure is positively associated with stroke,
especially among young adults.

Methods Study Population We included all Clalit Health Services members
with available geocoded addresses in Southern Israel, admitted to Soroka
University Medical Center (SUMC) with hemorrhagic (International
Classification of Diseases Ninth Revision [ICD9] 430--432) or ischemic
stroke (ICD9 432--435) between the years 2005 and 2012. SUMC is the only
medical center providing acute neurological care in the area, serving a
population of ≈1 million residents; therefore, all the patients with
stroke are referred to SUMC. Clalit Health Service is the largest health
care provider in the area, covering ≈70% of the population. To avoid
within subject correlation among recurrent events, we used only the
first stroke event, within the study period, for each subject.22

Received July 26, 2015; final revision received September 30, 2015;
accepted October 1, 2015. From the Department of Medicine, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel (M.Y.S.,
V.N.); Clinical Research Center (M.Y.S., V.N.) and Department of
Neurology, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel (G.I.,
A.H.); and Department of Geography and Environmental Development,
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer
Sheva, Israel (I.K.). The online-only Data Supplement is available with
this article at
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.
115.010992/-/DC1. Correspondence to Itai Kloog, PhD, Department of
Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, PO Box 653, Beer Sheva, Israel. E-mail ikloog@bgu.ac.il © 2015
American Heart Association, Inc. Stroke is available at
http://stroke.ahajournals.org

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.010992

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad 3348 Medical
Libraries Consortium on December 5, 2015

Yitshak Sade et al   Air Pollution and Stroke    3349

Clinical and Demographic Characteristics Demographic, clinical,
laboratory, and medication prescription data were available for all
subjects. Clalit Health Service uses electronic medical records system
with subjects identified by the national ID, and thus, the following
data were fully available: age, sex, ethnicity, comorbidities, body mass
index, smoking status, medications purchase, and socioeconomic status.
Socioeconomic status was defined based on home addresses and according
to the definitions of the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics assigning
socioeconomic status level in a scale of 1 to 10, based on the
population residing in the same statistical zone.23

Air Pollution and Meteorologic Data

roads (in meters). We have a priori defined young adults as subjects <55
years.27 Others were grouped into 2 age groups (55--65 and >65 years).
We further explored the associations with PM in groups in which we
observed significant associations with PM, using penalized splines to
allow the detection of nonlinear associations with the pollutants. Odds
ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were then obtained from the
regression predicted values and were calculated for IQR increases in
selected concentrations across the range of the pollutants. These data
were analyzed using a conditional logistic regression (coxph, R
statistical software, version 3.1.1). Results are presented as OR and
95% CI for an IQR increase of the pollutants daily average
concentration.

Exposure assessment was based on a hybrid satellite-based model
incorporating daily satellite remote sensing data at spatial resolution
of 1×1 km.19 Briefly, we make use of a new algorithm developed by
National Aeronautics and Space Administration --Multi-Angle
Implementation to Atmospheric Correction,24 which provides aerosol
optical depth data in a high resolution. Using mixed models, we
regressed daily PM10 and PM2.5 mass concentration from the Ministry of
Environmental Protection against aerosol optical depth, traditional land
use regression temporal predictors (obtained from the Technion Center of
Excellence in Exposure Science and Environmental Health air pollution
monitoring database) and spatial predictors (obtained through the
Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics and Survey Bureau mapping service).
When aerosol optical depth was not available, we fitted a generalized
additive model with a thin plate spline term of latitude and longitude
to interpolate the estimates. Good model performance was achieved, with
out-of-sample cross validation R2 of 0.79 and 0.72 for PM10 and PM2.5,
respectively. Both model predictions had little bias, with
cross-validated slopes (predicted versus observed) of 0.99. More
in-depth details can be found in Kloog et al.19 The daily average
concentrations of the pollutants, estimated throughout the studied
region, were assigned for each patient based on proximity to his
geocoded home address. Daily data on air temperature and relative
humidity for the study period were obtained from a central monitoring
site located in the center of the largest city of the region.

The IQR of PM10 ranged between 36.3 and 54.7 μg/m3, reaching a maximal
value of 235.2 μg/m3. The IQR of PM2.5 ranged between 16.7 and 23.3
μg/m3, reaching a maximal value of 75 mg/m3. Daily PM2.5 and PM10
concentrations were higher than the threshold, defined by the World
Health Organization guidelines, in 19% and 35% of the days,
respectively.28 The climate in the study region is relatively hot and
dry, reaching a maximal temperature of 33.5°C in the summer (Table 2).

Statistical Analysis

Short-Term Exposure Effect

Results are presented by mean±SD and interquartile range (IQR)
continuous variables and as percentages for categorical data. Continuous
variables were compared using independent t test or ANOVA. Mann--
Whitney test or Kruskal Wallis test were used if parametric assumptions
could not be satisfied. Pearson χ2 test was used to compare categorical
variables.

Air Pollution Exposure We examined the association between stroke and
PM10 or PM2.5 using a case-crossover design25; in which we sample only
cases and compared the subject's exposure in the case day to that
subject's exposure in other time periods. Because each subject serves as
their own control, all measured or unmeasured characteristics that do
not vary over time are matched by design and therefore cannot confound
the association with air pollution. To avoid confounding by seasonal
patterns, we used Navidi bidirectional approach and matched control days
on day of the week from the same month of the same year.26 Case period
was defined as the hospitalization day. One- to 4-day legged exposures
were tested as well. Associations with PM10 and PM2.5 were tested
separately and were adjusted for daily average temperature and relative
humidity. PM values higher than the 99th percentile were considered as
outliers and were excluded from the analyses.

Stratified Analyses In a stratified analysis by age, sex, comorbidities,
medications use, seasons, smoking, and distance from main roads, we
assessed whether the effect was modified by specific diagnoses and
personal characteristics. In the latter, patients were grouped by the
quartiles of distance from main

Results Population We identified 4837 subjects admitted to SUMC with
stroke between the years 2005 and 2012, of which 4325 were cases of
ischemic stroke. Figure 1 shows the study region. Half of the subjects
were males, and the mean age was 70 years. Diagnoses of ischemic stroke
and history of cardiovascular diseases were less frequent in younger
patients. The purchase of aspirin, lipid-modifying agents, and
antidiabetic medications were similar in all groups (Table 1).

Pollution and Meteorology

Using a case-crossover design, we examined the association between
stroke and short-term exposure to PM10 and PM2.5. Positive significant
associations between ischemic stroke and PM10 or PM2.5 concentrations in
the day of the event were observed among subjects <55 years (OR [95%
CI], 1.11 [1.02--1.20] and 1.10 [1.00--1.21], respectively). No
associations were found with hemorrhagic stroke (1.05 [0.96--1.14] and
1.04 [0.93--1.15] for an IQR elevation in PM10 and PM2.5, respectively)
or all available cases of ischemic stroke (Table 3). In a stratified
analysis by season, associations with PM10 and PM2.5 were observed only
among subjects admitted in the spring season (1.08 [1.01--1.15] and
1.077 [0.99--1.15], respectively). Sex, comorbidities, socioeconomic
status, smoking, ethnicity, and medications use did not modify the
associations.

Exposure Range and Distance From Main Roads Among subjects <55 years, we
found stronger associations with ischemic stroke within the lower ranges
of PM. For instance, an increase of IQR concentration of PM10 from 30 to
48 μg/m3 was associated with an OR of 1.16 (95% CI: 1.09-- 1.23),
compared with an OR of 1.10 (95% CI: 1.01--1.20) associated with IQR
elevation of PM10 between 160 and 178 μg/m3. Similar associations were
observed with PM2.5 (Fig. 2).

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on December 5, 2015

3350  Stroke  December 2015

Figure 1. A map of the studied region.

Of the young subjects (<55 years), 25% lived <75 m from a main road, 50%
lived 150 m from a main road, and 75% lived 250 m from a main road. When
stratifying these cases by the quartiles of distance from the nearest
main road, we found higher and significant risk for ischemic stroke only
among subjects living within 75 m from a main road (OR [95% CI], 1.22
[1.03--1.43] and 1.26 [1.04--1.51] for IQR increase of PM10 and PM2.5,
respectively). The risk estimates in all other distance groups were
similar and were, therefore, combined into 1 group: no associations were
observed among subjects living in further locations (OR [95% CI], 1.07
[0.97--1.18] and 1.04 [0.93--1.17] for IQR increase of PM10 and PM2.5,
respectively; Table I in the online-only Data Supplement). No
associations were found with PM10 or PM2.5 concentrations 1 to 4 days
before the hospitalization day.

Discussion In this large-scale case-crossover study, we found higher
risk of ischemic stroke associated with daily average PM10 and PM2.5
concentration on the day of the event, among young subjects. The
associations were more pronounced in the lower range of the pollutants,
where particles most likely originate from traffic,29 and among subjects
who reside in proximity to main roads.

Biological Mechanism Inflammation is a known casual factor for several
central nervous system diseases.30 Among the environmental exposures
that may induce inflammation and oxidative stress leading to central
nervous system pathology, air pollution may be considered as the most
prevalent source.31 The 2 possible pathways in which PM

can affect neurocognitive function are (1) oxidative stress induced by
respiratory intake of PM and the penetration of the inflammatory
compounds into the blood--brain barrier32; (2) direct entry of PM into
the central nervous system through the olfactory bulb.33

Stroke in the Young Unlike other studies that found higher risks for air
pollution-- related stroke in older patients,5,13 we observed
significant increased risk among subjects <55 years and found no
associations in other age groups. Stroke is less common and the cause is
much more diverse in young adults than in old patients.21 In older
patients, atherosclerosis is the main cause of ischemic stroke.21
Similarly, Ruidavets et al34 found that acute myocardial infarction in
patients with no vascular risk factors may be related to air pollution.
Their suggested explanation for this finding was reactive increased
vascular resistance in patients who are not chronically treated with
statins and vasodilators (as the older population with chronic vascular
risk factors).34 Another possible explanation is that atherosclerosis
makes the vessels less reactive,35 which actually protects the vessels
air pollution effects in older patients. In younger adults,
atherosclerosis remains an important risk factor, but cardiometabolic
cause is more common.36 Among other components, the cardiometabolic
syndrome can be associated with hypercoagulability and mediated by
inflammatory response and interferences in the coagulation process,
which may contribute to increased risk for cardiovascular events.37
Atrial fibrillation, a common cause for cerebral emboli38 is believed to
be under diagnosed in patients with stroke of undetermined cause.
Presentation of this common arrhythmia was

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on December 5, 2015

Yitshak Sade et al   Air Pollution and Stroke    3351 Table 1. 
Population Characteristics Population Characteristics

<55 y (n=545)

55--65 y (n=914)

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  65 y (3378)
#+END_QUOTE

P Value

 Male sex, % (n)

59.3 (323)

64.0 (585)

49.7 (1678)

<0.001

 Bedouin, % (n)

8.9 (47)

6.8 (62)

3.5 (119)

<0.001

Personal characteristics

 SES, median (min--max)

4 (0--10)

4 (0--10)

3 (0--10)

0.343

29.29±6.45

29.47±5.56

29.01±5.91

0.127

56.1 (235)

58.5 (432)

76.9 (2016)

8.1 (34)

10.9 (81)

9.7 (256)

35.8 (150)

30.5 (225)

13.3 (349)

  Hemorrhagic

14.4 (78)

10.8 (99)

9.9 (335)

  Ischemic

85.6 (467)

89.2 (815)

90.1 (3043)

0.008

 HTN

73.0 (309)

89.2 (815)

94.6 (3196)

<0.001

 IHD

24.8 (135)

39.8 (364)

48.9 (1653)

<0.001

 Dyslipidemia

85.1 (464)

92.3 (844)

85.3 (2882)

<0.001

 Diabetes mellitus

39.1 (213)

58.1 (531)

55.7 (1881)

<0.001

 Impaired fasting glucose

11.6 (63)

12.4 (113)

14.3 (483)

0.104

 Aspirin

13.4 (73)

12.7 (116)

11.4 (385)

0.283

 Lipids-modifying agents

11.2 (61)

12.1 (111)

10.1 (340)

0.171

 Antidiabetic medications

5.7 (31)

6.6 (60)

4.8 (163)

0.099

 BMI, mean±SD  Smoking, % (n)   No   Current
smoker   Past smoker

<0.001

 Stroke, % (n)

Comorbidities, % (n)

Medications,% (n)

BMI indicates body mass index; HTN, hypertension; IHD, ischemic heart
disease; Max, maximum; Min, minimum; and SES, socioeconomic status.

found39 to be associated with exposure to air pollution in young adults.
This yet unexplained association may contribute to the association
between stroke and air pollutants in young adults. Exposure to PM was
associated with elevated levels of C-reactive protein, fibrinogen, white
blood cells, and several inflammatory factors.4 Considering the
underling mechanism in which air pollution may be related to ischemic
stroke is based on inflammatory response, it is possible that air
pollution--induced stroke is more pronounced in younger patients, where
cardiometabolic-related stroke is more common. Similar to previous
studies, PM exposure in our study was associated with ischemic but not
with hemorrhagic stroke.3,6,8,10,13 Oudin et al,8 for instance, found a
13% increase in hospital admissions for ischemic stroke associated with
PM10 30 μg/m3 compared with PM10 <15 μg/m3; and Wellenius et al13 found
an estimated OR of 1.11 (95% CI: 1.03--1.20) for ischemic stroke
comparing the 25th and 75th percentiles of the daily average PM2.5
concentration. Although we observed no association with PM in all
available ischemic stroke cases, the associations observed among
specific subgroups were higher than most association reported to
date.3,5,7,13 Commonly used methods for exposure assessment in many of
the studies rely on ground monitoring data and are therefore prone to
exposure misclassification, which may dilute air pollution--associated
health effects.16 Using our PM prediction models, we were able to
include patients reside both in urban and in rural places and to obtain
spatially resolved PM estimates, which allowed us to reduce this
misclassification.

Traffic- Versus Natural-Related Air Pollution Given the natural and
anthropogenic sources of PM in the Negev area, the range of PM is wide,
with different compositions that characterize the pollutants.40 Krasnov
et al29 assessed the constant anthropogenic contribution of PM10 as an
average value of 34 μg/m3. Values >71 μg/m3 were found to be associated
with dust events.29 In its lower range, PM originates mostly from
traffic emissions.41 Higher levels of PM, recorded Table 2.  Summary
Statistics of Air Pollution and Meteorology Between the Years 2005 and
2012 Population Characteristics

Winter

Spring

Summer

Fall

PM10, μg/m

3

 IQR

36--61.7

37.6--63.2

36.3--47.7

35.5--55.8

55.7±34.5

54.8±27.6

43.1±11.9

48.4±20.5

 IQR

16.0--24.0

16.6--24.2

17.6--22.7

16.0--22.9

 Mean±SD

21.9±9.9

21.6±8.4

20.4±4.1

20.2±6.2

 IQR

11.4--15.0

17.5--22.4

24.7--26.9

16.5--23.0

 Mean±SD

13.4±3.2

20.2±3.6

25.8±1.9

19.8±4.0

 IQR

55.0--79.0

51.8--71.0

63.3--73.0

59.0--75.0

 Mean±SD

66.1±17.7

59.5±16.1

67.0±10.6

65.5±15.0

 Mean±SD PM2.5, μg/m3

Temperature

Relative humidity

IQR indicates Interquartile range; PM10, particulate matter <10 μm; and
PM2.5, particulate matter <2.5 μm.

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on December 5, 2015

3352  Stroke  December 2015 Table 3.  Association Between PM10, PM2.5,
and Ischemic Stroke: Case-Crossover Results

Limitations

PM10, OR (95% CI) P Value PM2.5, OR (95% CI) P Value All available cases

1.00 (0.97--1.03)

0.641

1.01 (0.97--1.04)

0.460

 <55

1.11 (1.02--1.20)*

0.010

1.10 (1.00--1.21)* 0.037

 55--65

0.97 (0.90--1.04)

0.467

0.99 (0.90--1.04)

0.877

 >65

0.99 (0.96--1.03)

0.910

1.00 (0.96--1.03)

0.942

By age, y

The results of single pollutant models of the association between stroke
and daily average concentrations of PM10 or PM2.5 at the day of the
event, among all available cases and stratified by age are given in this
table. Each association with PM was adjusted for average temperature and
average relative humidity at the day of the event. Results are presented
as OR and 95% CI for IQR increase in PM10 (18.4 μg/m3) or PM2.5 (6.6
μg/m3). CI indicates confidence intervals; IQR, interquartile range; OR,
odds ratio; PM10, particulate matter <10 μm; and PM2.5, particulate
matter <2.5 μm. *P<0.05.

during dust events, are mostly of natural origin and have different
mineral and chemical compositions.29,40 Studies that evaluated the
toxicity of PM by its source, size, and composition have found particles
with industrial and traffic components to be highly toxic.42,43 Although
we did not examine the speciation of PM, we did find stronger
associations with PM within its lower range and among subjects who
reside in proximity to main roads, emphasizing the role of PM
composition in addition to its mass.

Our study had several limitations. First, we did not have information on
the exact onset of stroke symptoms, which may have caused
misclassification in the definition of a case day. However, because
stroke events require urgent care and hospitalizations and because SUMC
is the only available hospital in the region, we think that the
misclassification will be minor. Second, we were not able to adjust the
effect for traffic noise and gaseous air pollutants in our models and
therefore cannot rule out the contribution of these factors to the
higher stroke risks found among subjects residing in proximity to major
roads.44 In addition, we did not have information about smoking history
and therefore could not fully assess the modification by smoking status.
Finally, the use of 1×1 km model could also be improved as higher
resolution satellite data become available. As satellite remote sensing
evolves and progresses, finer resolution data should enable us to assess
more precise estimated daily individual exposure as they relate to
different locations such as residence and work place for data sets where
individual addresses are available.

Conclusions We observed higher risk for ischemic stroke associated with
PM in the day of the event, among young adults. This finding can be
explained by the inflammatory mechanism, linking air pollution and
stroke. Our findings suggest stronger effect of traffic pollution and
not pollution of natural sources.

Subjects younger than 55 years 4

4

OR [95% CI] for an IQR increase in PM between: 20 and 38 1.23
[0.95;1.59] 30 and 48 1.16 [1.09;1.23] 90 and 108 1.12[1.01;1.25] 160
and 178 1.10[1.01;1.20]

3 OR and 95% CI

OR and 95% CI

3

OR [95% CI] for an IQR increase in PM between: 10 and 16 1.32
[0.92;1.79] 30 and 36 1.23[1.09;1.40] 40 and 46 1.14[0.99;1.30] 50 and
56 0.94[0.80;1.04]

2

1

2

1 p=0.011

p=0.031

0

0 0

50

100

150

200

Daily average concentrations of PM10

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Daily average concentrations of PM2.5

Figure 2. The association between ischemic stroke and daily average
concentrations of particulate matter <10 μm (PM10) or particulate matter
<2.5 μm (PM2.5) in the day of the event, among patients <55 years. The
line represents odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI)
obtained from a penalized spline function of the pollutants. This figure
show the estimated risk for ischemic stroke associated with
interquartile range (IQR) elevation in daily average concentrations of
PM10 (18 μg/m3) and PM2.5 (6 μg/m3), calculated from increments of the
penalized spline functions in selected places of the distribution.

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on December 5, 2015

Yitshak Sade et al   Air Pollution and Stroke    3353

Sources of Funding This research was supported by the Milgrom Foundation
of Science (M.F.S.).

None.

Disclosures References

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
     1.  Peters A, Dockery DW, Muller JE, Mittleman MA. Increased particulate
#+END_EXAMPLE

air pollution and the triggering of myocardial infarction. Circulation.
2001;103:2810--2815. 2. Barnett AG, Williams GM, Schwartz J, Best TL,
Neller AH, Petroeschevsky AL, et al. The effects of air pollution on
hospitalizations for cardiovascular disease in elderly people in
Australian and New Zealand cities. Environ Health Perspect.
2006;114:1018--1023. 3. Kloog I, Coull BA, Zanobetti A, Koutrakis P,
Schwartz JD. Acute and chronic effects of particles on hospital
admissions in New-England. PLoS One. 2012;7:e34664. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0034664. 4. Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA III,
Brook JR, Bhatnagar A, DiezRoux AV, et al; American Heart Association
Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on the Kidney in
Cardiovascular Disease; Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and
Metabolism. Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease:
an update to the scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2010;121:2331--2378. doi:
10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181dbece1. 5. Hong YC, Lee JT, Kim H, Ha EH, Schwartz
J, Christiani DC. Effects of air pollutants on acute stroke mortality.
Environ Health Perspect. 2002;110:187--191. 6. Mateen FJ, Brook RD. Air
pollution as an emerging global risk factor for stroke. JAMA.
2011;305:1240--1241. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.352. 7. Lisabeth LD, Escobar
JD, Dvonch JT, Sánchez BN, Majersik JJ, Brown DL, et al. Ambient air
pollution and risk for ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack.
Ann Neurol. 2008;64:53--59. doi: 10.1002/ana.21403. 8. Oudin A,
Strömberg U, Jakobsson K, Stroh E, Björk J. Estimation of short-term
effects of air pollution on stroke hospital admissions in southern
Sweden. Neuroepidemiology. 2010;34:131--142. doi: 10.1159/000274807. 9.
Miller KA, Siscovick DS, Sheppard L, Shepherd K, Sullivan JH, Anderson
GL, et al. Long-term exposure to air pollution and incidence of
cardiovascular events in women. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:447--458. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa054409. 10. Hong YC, Lee JT, Kim H, Kwon HJ. Air
pollution: a new risk factor in ischemic stroke mortality. Stroke.
2002;33:2165--2169. 11. Peters A, Liu E, Verrier RL, Schwartz J, Gold
DR, Mittleman M, et al. Air pollution and incidence of cardiac
arrhythmia. Epidemiology. 2000;11:11--17. 12. Tsai SS, Goggins WB, Chiu
HF, Yang CY. Evidence for an association between air pollution and daily
stroke admissions in Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Stroke. 2003;34:2612--2616. doi:
10.1161/01.STR.0000095564.33543.64. 13. Wellenius GA, Schwartz J,
Mittleman MA. Air pollution and hospital admissions for ischemic and
hemorrhagic stroke among medicare beneficiaries. Stroke.
2005;36:2549--2553. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000189687.78760.47. 14.
O'Donnell MJ, Fang J, Mittleman MA, Kapral MK, Wellenius GA;
Investigators of the Registry of Canadian Stroke Network. Fine
particulate air pollution (PM2.5) and the risk of acute ischemic stroke.
Epidemiology. 2011;22:422--431. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e3182126580. 15.
Pope CA III, Burnett RT, Thurston GD, Thun MJ, Calle EE, Krewski D, et
al. Cardiovascular mortality and long-term exposure to particulate air
pollution: epidemiological evidence of general pathophysiological
pathways of disease. Circulation. 2004;109:71--77. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000108927.80044.7F. 16. Hoek G, Beelen R, de Hoogh K, Vienneau D,
Gulliver J, Fischer P, et al. A review of land-use regression models to
assess spatial variation of outdoor air pollution. Atmos Environ.
2008;42:7561--7578. doi: 10.1016/j. atmosenv.2008.05.057. 17. Zeger SL,
Thomas D, Dominici F, Samet JM, Schwartz J, Dockery D, et al. Exposure
measurement error in time-series studies of air pollution: concepts and
consequences. Environ Health Perspect. 2000;108:419--426. 18. Nordio F,
Kloog I, Coull BA, Chudnovsky A, Grillo P, Bertazzi PA, et al.
Estimating spatio-temporal resolved PM10 aerosol mass concentrations
using modis satellite data and land use regression over Lombardy, Italy.
Atmos Environ. 2013;74:227--236. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2013.03.043.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
     19.     Kloog I, Chudnovsky AA, Just AC, Nordio F, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, et
#+END_EXAMPLE

al. A new hybrid spatio-temporal model for estimating daily multi-year
pm2.5 concentrations across northeastern USA using high resolution
aerosol optical depth data. Atmos Environ. 2014;95:581--590 20. Offer
ZY, Azmon E. Chemistry and mineralogy of 4 dust storms in the northern
negev desert, Israel (1988--1992). Sci Total Environ. 1994;143:235--243
21. Naess H, Tatlisumak T, Kõrv J. Stroke in the young. Stroke Res
Treat. 2011;2011:271979. doi: 10.4061/2011/271979. 22. Luo X, Sorock GS.
Analysis of recurrent event data under the case-crossover design with
applications to elderly falls. Stat Med. 2008;27:2890-- 2901. doi:
10.1002/sim.3171. 23. Central Bureau of Statistics. Characterization and
Ranking of Local Authorities According to the Population's Socio
Economic Level in 2001. http://www.cbs.gov.il/hodaot2004/13\_04\_22.htm.
Accessed May 25, 2015. 24. Lyapustin A, Wang Y, Laszlo I, Kahn R, Korkin
S, Remer L, et al. Multiangle implementation of atmospheric correction
(maiac): 2. Aerosol algorithm. J Geophys Res Atmos. 2011;116:D03211. 25.
Maclure M. The case-crossover design: a method for studying transient
effects on the risk of acute events. Am J Epidemiol. 1991;133:144--153.
26. Navidi W. Bidirectional case-crossover designs for exposures with
time trends. Biometrics. 1998;54:596--605. 27. You RX, McNeil JJ,
O'Malley HM, Davis SM, Thrift AG, Donnan GA. Risk factors for stroke due
to cerebral infarction in young adults. Stroke. 1997;28:1913--1918. 28.
World Health Organization. Who Air Quality Guidelines for Particulate
Matter, Ozone, Nitrogen Dioxide and Sulfur Dioxide.
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2006/WHO\_SDE\_PHE\_OEH\_06.02\_eng.pdf?ua=1.
Accessed June 17, 2015. 29. Krasnov H, Katra I, Koutrakis P, Friger MD.
Contribution of dust storms to PM10 levels in an urban arid environment.
J Air Waste Manag Assoc. 2014;64:89--94. 30. Block ML, Zecca L, Hong JS.
Microglia-mediated neurotoxicity: uncovering the molecular mechanisms.
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2007;8:57--69. doi: 10.1038/nrn2038. 31. Craig L,
Brook JR, Chiotti Q, Croes B, Gower S, Hedley A, et al. Air pollution
and public health: a guidance document for risk managers. J Toxicol
Environ Health A. 2008;71:588--698. doi: 10.1080/15287390801997732. 32.
Genc S, Zadeoglulari Z, Fuss SH, Genc K. The adverse effects of air
pollution on the nervous system. J Toxicol. 2012;2012:782462. doi:
10.1155/2012/782462. 33. Doty RL. The olfactory vector hypothesis of
neurodegenerative disease: is it viable? Ann Neurol. 2008;63:7--15. doi:
10.1002/ana.21327. 34. Ruidavets JB, Cournot M, Cassadou S, Giroux M,
Meybeck M, Ferrières J. Ozone air pollution is associated with acute
myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2005;111:563--569. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000154546.32135.6E. 35. Mueed I, Zhang Y, Aziz T, Chu V, Janssen
LJ. Structural and electrophysiological changes in atherosclerotic
radial artery grafts account for impairment of vessel reactivity.
Atherosclerosis. 2009;206:405--410. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.03.022. 36. Griffiths D, Sturm J.
Epidemiology and etiology of young stroke. Stroke Res Treat.
2011;2011:209370. doi: 10.4061/2011/209370. 37. Govindarajan G,
Whaley-Connell A, Mugo M, Stump C, Sowers JR. The cardiometabolic
syndrome as a cardiovascular risk factor. Am J Med Sci.
2005;330:311--318. 38. Wolf PA, Abbott RD, Kannel WB. Atrial
fibrillation as an independent risk factor for stroke: the Framingham
study. Stroke. 1991;22:983--988. 39. Yitshak-Sade M, Vodonos A, Novack
V, Friger M, Amit G, Katra I, et al. Can air pollution trigger an onset
of atrial fibrillation: a population-based study. Air Qual Atmos Health.
2014;8:413--420. doi: 10.1007/s11869-014-0295-2. 40. Ganor E, Stupp A,
Alpert P. A method to determine the effect of mineral dust aerosols on
air quality. Atmos Environ. 2009;43:5463--5468. doi:
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.07.028. 41. Moeller DW. Environmental Health.
3rd ed. Boston, MA: Harvard College; 2005:27--50. 42. Kelly FJ, Fussell
JC. Size, source and chemical composition as determinants of toxicity
attributable to ambient particulate matter. Atmos Environ.
2012;60:504--526. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.06.039. 43. Zanobetti A,
Franklin M, Koutrakis P, Schwartz J. Fine particulate air pollution and
its components in association with causespecific emergency admissions.
Environ Health. 2009;8:12. doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-8-58. 44. Sørensen M,
Hvidberg M, Andersen ZJ, Nordsborg RB, Lillelund KG, Jakobsen J, et al.
Road traffic noise and stroke: a prospective cohort study. Eur Heart J.
2011;32:737--744. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq466.

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on December 5, 2015

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

Supplementary Table I. The association between PM10, PM2.5 and ischemic
stroke among patients<55 years: case- crossover results, stratified by
distance from main roads

PM10 OR(95%CI) Distance from main roads ≤75 meters >75 meters

*p<0.05

1.22(1.03;1.43) 1.07(0.97;1.18)

P value

PM2.5 OR(95%CI)

0.015* 1.26(1.04;1.51) 0.144 1.04(0.93;1.17)

P value

0.013* 0.424

Air Pollution and Ischemic Stroke Among Young Adults Maayan Yitshak
Sade, Victor Novack, Gal Ifergane, Anat Horev and Itai Kloog Stroke.
2015;46:3348-3353; originally published online November 3, 2015; doi:
10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.010992 Stroke is published by the American Heart
Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231 Copyright © 2015
American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved. Print ISSN:
0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628

The online version of this article, along with updated information and
services, is located on the World Wide Web at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/46/12/3348

Data Supplement (unedited) at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2015/11/03/STROKEAHA.115.010992.DC1.html

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or
portions of articles originally published in Stroke can be obtained via
RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the
Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for
which permission is being requested is located, click Request
Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further
information about this process is available in the Permissions and
Rights Question and Answer document. Reprints: Information about
reprints can be found online at: http://www.lww.com/reprints
Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Stroke is online at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on December 5, 2015


