LETTERS PUBLISHED ONLINE: 13 JULY 2015 | DOI: 10.1038/NCLIMATE2704

Impacts of temperature and its variability on mortality in New England
Liuhua Shi1, Itai Kloog2, Antonella Zanobetti1, Pengfei Liu3 and Joel D.
Schwartz1,4* Rapid build-up of greenhouse gases is expected to increase
Earth's mean surface temperature, with unclear effects on temperature
variability1--3 . This makes understanding the direct effects of a
changing climate on human health more urgent. However, the effects of
prolonged exposures to variable temperatures, which are important for
understanding the public health burden, are unclear. Here we demonstrate
that long-term survival was significantly associated with both seasonal
mean values and standard deviations of temperature among the Medicare
population (aged 65+) in New England, and break that down into long-term
contrasts between ZIP codes and annual anomalies. A rise in summer mean
temperature of 1 ◦ C was associated with a 1.0% higher death rate,
whereas an increase in winter mean temperature corresponded to a 0.6%
decrease in mortality. Increases in standard deviations of temperature
for both summer and winter were harmful. The increased mortality in
warmer summers was entirely due to anomalies, whereas it was long-term
average differences in the standard deviation of summer temperatures
across ZIP codes that drove the increased risk. For future climate
scenarios, seasonal mean temperatures may in part account for the public
health burden, but the excess public health risk of climate change may
also stem from changes of within-season temperature variability.
Emissions of greenhouse gases will change the Earth's climate, most
notably by changing temperature and temperature variability1 . The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in its newly released
Fifth Assessment Report, forecasts a rise in world average temperature
ranging from 0.2--5.5 ◦ C by 2100 (ref. 1). This has increased interest
in the impact of temperature on health. Although many studies have
reported associations between short-term temperature changes and
increased daily deaths4--11 , evidence on the association between annual
mortality and changes in seasonal temperature averages is scarce12,13 .
As such impacts by definition cannot be short-term mortality
displacement (we are looking at annual averages and displacement of
deaths by a few weeks will not influence these), these results can imply
important public health effects of the changing climate. In addition to
the seasonal mean temperature, its variability may also play a
significant role in raising the risk of mortality12,14 . There is
evidence that people adapt to the usual temperature in their city14,15 .
For these reasons, this study focused on both mean temperature, and
temperature variability for summer and winter. Conventionally, ambient
temperature (Ta ) was obtained from monitors near airports, and analysed
at the city or county level16 . Overlooking the temporal and spatial
variation of Ta may

introduce an exposure measurement error and may bias health effect
estimates17 . We recently presented new hybrid models for assessing
high-resolution spatio-temporal Ta for epidemiological studies, based on
surface temperature (Ts ) measured by satellite. This approach allows
prediction of daily Ta at 1 × 1 km spatial resolution throughout the New
England area18 . We also showed that using high-resolution Ta predicted
from the hybrid models better captured the associations between Ta and
adverse health outcomes than temperature data from existing monitoring
stations19 . Using temporally and spatially resolved Ta estimates, the
present study aims to tease apart the associations of annual all-cause
mortality with seasonal mean temperature and temperature variability for
both summer and winter, among the Medicare population in New England
during 2000--2008, and to further separate these into long-term spatial
differences and annual anomalies. Temperature variability is represented
by the standard deviation of daily mean temperature within season. The
results, presented as percentage increases in mortality, are shown in
Fig. 1 for spatial contrasts, annual anomalies, and the overall effect
estimates. Both seasonal mean temperatures and their standard deviations
were significantly associated with all-cause mortality for summer and
winter (p < 0.05). A rise of 1 ◦ C in summer mean temperature
corresponded to an overall estimated 1.0% increase in mortality (95% CI:
0.6, 1.5%). This was entirely due to yearly anomalies; living in a
location with long-term warmer summer temperatures in New England was
associated with lower mortality rates, suggesting acclimatization. A 1 ◦
C increase in winter mean temperature was observed to lower mortality by
0.6% (95% CI: 0.3, 0.9%). Here, it was the spatial contrast that was
associated with lower mortality, and the anomalies with higher
mortality, suggesting little acclimatization to cold. For each 1 ◦ C
increase in standard deviation of temperature, 1.3% (95% CI: 0.2, 2.4%)
and 4.1% (95% CI: 3.0, 5.2%) increases in annual deaths were seen in
summer and winter, respectively. The observed associations in summer and
winter were respectively attributable to spatial contrasts and yearly
anomalies. A key result of this study is that increases in temperature
variability can have similar estimated effects on mortality as increases
in mean temperature. This makes understanding the effect of climate
change on seasonal temperature variability important for assessing
health risks. In addition, we found that small area variations in
long-term average temperature and its standard deviation across New
England are associated with differences in mortality rates, which are
quite different from the associations with anomalies. In particular,
they suggest that even within New England, places with typically warmer
summers have lower annual mortality

1 Department

of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 2 Department of Geography and
Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer
Sheva, PO Box 653, Israel. 3 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. 4 Department of
Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. *e-mail: joel@hsph.harvard.edu

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION |
www.nature.com/natureclimatechange

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

1

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE DOI: 10.1038/NCLIMATE2704 a

Percentage increase per IQR increase

10 5 0

Summer s.d.

∗ ∗

∗ ∗

∗

∗ ∗

∗

∗

Overall Spatial contrast Yearly anomaly Summer mean

Winter mean

Summer s.d.

Winter s.d.

Figure 1 | Changes in mortality due to seasonal mean temperature and
temperature variability across New England, 2003--2008. Percentage
increase in mortality for per 1 ◦ C (a) and per interquartile range
(IQR) (b). A sensitivity analysis controlling for the number of heat
waves in each ZIP code in each year found essentially identical results.
Error bars stand for 95% confidence intervals. s.d. is standard
deviation. ∗ p < 0.05.

rates whereas anomalies are associated with higher annual mortality
rates in that year. Hence, the negative health impacts of climate change
may stem from the increase in year-to-year fluctuations of temperature
from a level that people have been acclimated to for a long time, or an
increase in daily variability within season, rather than the warmer
temperature itself. Short-term associations between daily temperature
and mortality have been reported to be greater in locations with larger
seasonal temperature variability9,14 . Several recent studies suggested
that a large change in temperature between neighbouring days can elevate
daily mortality10,11 . Hence, temperature variability emerges as an
important risk factor for both short-term and long-term survival.
Subjects exercising in hot conditions for 12 days doubled their
endurance time, whereas subjects alternately exercising in mild and hot
conditions did not20 . This suggests that more temperature variability
in the summer can impede adaptation, which is consistent with our
associations with seasonal standard deviation. However, the underlying
mechanisms for the observed relationship with seasonal mean temperature
remain unresolved. That more people die when summers are warmer or when
winters are colder than normal for their ZIP code may be due to
accumulating effects over the season on the changes in blood pressure
associated with short-term change in temperature, or lack of behavioural
response. Our results also suggest that living in warmer ZIP codes in
New England reduced long-term mortality in both summer and winter, but
living in ZIP codes with more variable temperature in either summer or
winter increased mortality. In addition, higher annual anomalies were
significantly associated with increased long-term mortality, although
insignificantly for the standard deviation of summer temperature. We
also examined effect modifications (Figs 2 and 3). For seasonal mean
temperature anomalies, consistent increases in mortality rates for
positive anomalies were seen across the groups (see Fig. 2). Although
some differences were statistically significant (for example, between
males and females for summer mean), the differences in effects were not
large, except for some noise in smaller 2

c

∗

−5 −10

Winter s.d.

0.0 −1.5

−3

−3.0

−6

6

Summer temperature s.d. annual anomaly ∗

3

16 8

0

0

−3

−8

−6

−16

d 10

∗

0

Winter temperature s.d. annual anomaly ∗

5

24

∗

12

0

0

−5

−12

−10

−24

l

b

Winter mean

Al

Summer mean

−24

Winter mean temperature annual anomaly 3.0 6 ∗ 1.5 3

∗

k ia sp n an ic O th er

−10

−8

∗

As

−5

−12

Hi

b

−4

∗

te

∗

0

ac

∗

∗

0

hi

0

∗

Bl

∗

∗ ∗

W

∗

5

Summer mean temperature annual anomaly 24 ∗ ∗ 4 12 8

∗

M a Fe le m al e

∗

ra Ur l ba n Ag e < Ag 75 e ≥ 75

Percentage increase per 1 °C increase

10

Percentage increase per 1 °C increase

a

Ru

LETTERS

Figure 2 | Modifications of the effect for annual anomalies of different
temperature indices by population density, age, sex and race. Percentage
increases in mortality (95% CI) for each 1 ◦ C increase in summer mean
temperature annual anomaly (a), winter mean temperature annual anomaly
(b), summer temperature standard deviation (s.d.) annual anomaly (c) and
winter temperature standard deviation (s.d.) annual anomaly (d) in each
subgroup, respectively. Red indicates increased risk of death and blue
stands for decreased risk of death. Error bars stand for 95% confidence
intervals. The dashed lines indicate the effect estimates for all
groups. ∗ p < 0.05, indicates significantly different estimates versus
the first subgroup.

racial groups. Anomalies for the standard deviation of temperature
within winter also showed consistently positive associations across
groups. Summer temperature standard deviation anomalies showed no
association with mortality overall, but opposite effects by age, with
higher mortality rates in persons 75+, and lower rates in 65--75. For
ZIP code differences in the long-term means of the temperature
parameters, more heterogeneity was seen across population groups (see
Fig. 3). Higher effect estimates were found in less dense areas for both
mean and standard deviation of summer temperature. This is consistent
with a recent study suggesting that subjects in rural counties were more
vulnerable to heat21 . We also found that subjects in urban areas
benefited more from living in regions with warmer winters, but were at
higher risk for elevated winter temperature variability. In addition,
the relatively younger age group (65--74 yr) was more sensitive to the
changes of most temperature indices. This may be due to their having
more outdoor activities than the older age group. A similar reason may
also explain why, in summer, higher effect estimates were found for
subjects living in rural areas. However, in the cold and snowy winter of
New England, possibly outdoor activities of studied subjects in rural
areas were limited, therefore winter mean temperature and its standard
deviation had lower effect estimates for subjects in rural areas than
that in urban areas. Females were more sensitive to increased mean
temperature in summer and winter, but less sensitive to increased
standard deviation of summer temperature

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION |
www.nature.com/natureclimatechange

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE DOI: 10.1038/NCLIMATE2704 Spatial contrast in
summer mean temperature 16

3

∗

0

8 0

−3

−8 −16

2.4

Spatial contrast in winter mean temperature 10

1.2

∗

0.0

∗

5 0

−1.2

−5

−2.4

−10

50

Spatial contrast in summer temperature s.d. 60

25

∗

0

∗

∗

30 0

−25

−30

−50

−60

10

Spatial contrast in winter temperature s.d. 40 ∗

5

20

∗

0

te

M a Fe le m al e

ra Ru

Al

Ur l ba n Ag e < Ag 75 e ≥ 75

−20 −40

l

−5

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

0

−10

∗

k As Hi ian sp an ic O th er

d

W hi

Percentage increase per 1 °C increase

∗

−6

b

c

∗

ac

6

Bl

a

Figure 3 | Modifications of the effect for spatial variability in
different temperature indices by population density, age, sex and race.
Percentage increases in mortality (95% CI) for each 1 ◦ C increase in
spatial contrasts of summer mean temperature (a), spatial contrasts of
winter mean temperature (b), spatial contrasts of summer temperature
standard deviation (s.d.) (c) and spatial contrasts of winter
temperature standard deviation (s.d.) (d) in each subgroup,
respectively. Red indicates increased risk of death and blue stands for
decreased risk of death. Error bars stand for 95% confidence intervals.
∗ p < 0.05.

than males. We saw a number of interactions by race that are not always
easy to understand. It is possible that the decreased risk of death in
locations with higher summer mean temperatures in Asian, Hispanic and
‘other' race group is because elderly subjects in these groups
immigrated from warm areas, such as South China, Southeast Asia, India
and Mexico. These subjects were more acclimated to a warmer summer. This
could also explain why Asian, Hispanic and ‘other' race groups
significantly benefited more from a warmer winter, but were more
adversely impacted by greater winter standard deviation. However, we
note that the percentage of the population over 65 in New England that
is not white is only 5.9%, and for 4.3% of ZIP codes was zero, so some
of the observed variability across race may result from unstable
estimates. A potential limitation of the present study is that there is
still a possible residual unknown resulting from the lack of individual
level risk factors for mortality. In addition, bias could also be
induced by spatial or temporal auto-correlation, which can lead to
spuriously narrow standard errors and CIs.

Implications for future climate research Scientific understanding of how
mean surface temperature responds to the increasing anthropogenic
emission of GHGs has been greatly improved in recent decades1 .
Considering the comparable increments of both summer and winter mean
temperatures predicted for the future 50 years, the benefit of warmer
winters may be largely compensated by the harm of hotter summers.
However,

LETTERS for annual anomalies, warmer winter temperature actually
increases annual mortality. The degree of temperature variability, such
as the within-season standard deviation, which is influenced by many
factors, such as the intensity and pattern of atmospheric circulations,
remains highly uncertain for future climate scenarios22,23 . For
example, Petoukhov and Semenov proposed that the weakening of the polar
vortex may bring about an increased frequency of very cold winters in
northern America24 . However, Huntingford and co-authors suggested that
there is no significant change in global temperature variability in
spite of changing regional patterns3 . That study assessed variability
across the entire year, including seasonal variability, and it is not
clear whether variability changed within some seasons3 . This
uncertainty can be propagated into the projection of temperature-related
health risk. This study, by estimating impacts of both mean temperature
and temperature variability in summer and winter simultaneously, adds
considerable strength to the evidence of a significant association
between mortality and prolonged exposures to temperatures, especially
temperature variability. In addition to the within-season variability we
also showed that between-year variability (anomalies) increased
mortality risks. Hence, the variability of atmospheric temperature
emerges as a key factor of the potential health impacts of climate
change. This work provides an important example of how temperature may
affect human health in a temperate climate region. We would expect that
the health effects of seasonal mean temperature and temperature
variability can vary greatly among different climate zones12 . Such
variation may also exist across areas with distinct socio-economical
status, which can convey vulnerability to the changing climate. A
quantitative assessment of the projected risk of human health associated
with future climate change can be estimated globally by incorporating
more comprehensive epidemiological studies and projected climate
scenario data for different climate zones. However, as an important
environmental stressor emphasized in this study, the uncertainty of the
projected changes in the temperature variability can induce significant
errors in such estimates. Hence, better climate projections on
temperature variability at multiple scales are important in assessing
the risks to human health.

Methods Methods and any associated references are available in the
online version of the paper. Received 13 February 2015; accepted 3 June
2015; published online 13 July 2015

References 1. IPCC Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis (eds
Stocker, T. et al.) (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2013). 2. Alexander, L. &
Perkins, S. Debate heating up over changes in climate variability.
Environ. Res. Lett. 8, 041001 (2013). 3. Huntingford, C., Jones, P. D.,
Livina, V. N., Lenton, T. M. & Cox, P. M. No increase in global
temperature variability despite changing regional patterns. Nature 500,
327--330 (2013). 4. Schwartz, J., Samet, J. M. & Patz, J. A. Hospital
admissions for heart disease: The effects of temperature and humidity.
Epidemiology 15, 755--761 (2004). 5. Goodman, P. G., Dockery, D. W. &
Clancy, L. Cause-specific mortality and the extended effects of
particulate pollution and temperature exposure. Environ. Health
Perspect. 112, 179--185 (2004). 6. Barnett, A. G. Temperature and
cardiovascular deaths in the US elderly: Changes over time. Epidemiology
18, 369--372 (2007). 7. Anderson, B. G. & Bell, M. L. Weather-related
mortality: How heat, cold, and heat waves affect mortality in the United
States. Epidemiology 20, 205--213 (2009). 8. Yu, W. et al. Daily average
temperature and mortality among the elderly: A meta-analysis and
systematic review of epidemiological evidence. Int. J. Biometeorol. 56,
569--581 (2012).

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION |
www.nature.com/natureclimatechange

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

3

LETTERS

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE DOI: 10.1038/NCLIMATE2704

9.  Braga, A. L., Zanobetti, A. & Schwartz, J. The effect of weather on
    respiratory and cardiovascular deaths in 12 US cities. Environ.
    Health Perspect. 110, 859--863 (2002).
10. Guo, Y. et al. A large change in temperature between neighbouring
    days increases the risk of mortality. PLoS ONE 6, e16511 (2011).
11. Lin, H. et al. Temperature changes between neighboring days and
    mortality in summer: A distributed lag non-linear time series
    analysis. PLoS ONE 8, e66403 (2013).
12. Zanobetti, A., O'Neill, M. S., Gronlund, C. J. & Schwartz, J. D.
    Summer temperature variability and long-term survival among elderly
    people with chronic disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109,
    6608--6613 (2012).
13. Rehill, N., Armstrong, B. & Wilkinson, P. Clarifying life lost due
    to cold and heat: A new approach using annual time series. BMJ Open
    5, e005640 (2015).
14. Braga, A. L. F., Zanobetti, A. & Schwartz, J. The time course of
    weather-related deaths. Epidemiology 12, 662--667 (2001).
15. McGeehin, M. A. & Mirabelli, M. The potential impacts of climate
    variability and change on temperature-related morbidity and
    mortality in the United States. Environ. Health Perspect. 109,
    185--189 (2001).
16. Basu, R. High ambient temperature and mortality: A review of
    epidemiologic studies from 2001 to 2008. Environ. Health 8, 40--52
    (2009).
17. Thomas, D., Stram, D. & Dwyer, J. Exposure measurement error:
    Influence on exposure-disease relationships and methods of
    correction. Annu. Rev. Public Health 14, 69--93 (1993).
18. Kloog, I., Nordio, F., Coull, B. A. & Schwartz, J. Predicting
    spatiotemporal mean air temperature using MODIS satellite surface
    temperature measurements across the Northeastern USA. Remote Sens.
    Environ. 150, 132--139 (2014).
19. Kloog, I., Melly, S. J., Coull, B. A., Nordio, F. & Schwartz, J. D.
    Using satellite-based spatiotemporal resolved air temperature
    exposure to study the association between ambient air temperature
    and birth outcomes in Massachusetts. Environ. Health Perspect.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ ehp.1308075 (2015).
20. Nielsen, B. et al. Human circulatory and thermoregulatory
    adaptations with heat acclimation and exercise in a hot, dry
    environment. J. Physiol. 460, 467--485 (1993).

21. Lippmann, S. J., Fuhrmann, C. M., Waller, A. E. & Richardson, D. B.
    Ambient temperature and emergency department visits for heat-related
    illness in North Carolina, 2007--2008. Environ. Res. 124, 35--42
    (2013).
22. Zorita, E. & González-Rouco, F. Disagreement between predictions of
    the future behavior of the Arctic Oscillation as simulated in two
    different climate models: Implications for global warming. Geophys.
    Res. Lett. 27, 1755--1758 (2000).
23. Riddle, E. E., Butler, A. H., Furtado, J. C., Cohen, J. L. & Kumar,
    A. CFSv2 ensemble prediction of the wintertime Arctic Oscillation.
    Clim. Dynam. 41, 1099--1116 (2013).
24. Petoukhov, V. & Semenov, V. A. A link between reduced Barents--Kara
    sea ice and cold winter extremes over northern continents. J.
    Geophys. Res. 115 (2010).

4

Acknowledgements This study was funded by NIEHS grants R21ES020695 and
R21ES024012. This publication was also made possible by USEPA grant
(RD-83479801). Its contents are solely the responsibility of the grantee
and do not necessarily represent the official views of the USEPA.
Further, USEPA does not endorse the purchase of any commercial products
or services mentioned in the publication. The authors also thank L. Shen
for fruitful discussions.

Author contributions J.D.S. designed the research and directed its
implementation; A.Z. and I.K. prepared the data set; L.S., P.L. and
J.D.S. analysed data; L.S., P.L. and J.D.S. wrote the paper; all authors
contributed to revision of the manuscript.

Additional information Supplementary information is available in the
online version of the paper. Reprints and permissions information is
available online at www.nature.com/reprints. Correspondence and requests
for materials should be addressed to J.D.S.

Competing financial interests The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION |
www.nature.com/natureclimatechange

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE DOI: 10.1038/NCLIMATE2704 Methods Study
population. We constructed a cohort using Medicare data for all
residents aged 65 and older for the years 2000--2008 in New England (see
Supplementary Table 1 in Supplementary Methods). This was an open
cohort, including eligible persons from 1999, or at the year when they
subsequently turned 65. Subjects entered the cohort for survival if they
were still alive on 1 January of the year following the year that they
enrolled in Medicare, and follow-up years (our time metric) were
calendar years. As a national social insurance programme administered by
the US federal government since 1966, Medicare guarantees Americans aged
65 and older access to health insurance25 . The Medicare beneficiary
denominator file from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid services
(CMS) lists all beneficiaries enrolled in the Medicare Fee-for-service
(FFS), and contains information on beneficiaries' eligibility and
enrolment in Medicare, as well as the date of death. Exposure data. The
present study uses 1 × 1 km ambient temperature (Ta ) data estimated
from surface temperature (Ts ) measured by satellites18 . Specifically,
we started by calibrating the Ts − Ta relationship for each day using
grid cells with both Ta and Ts measurements (model 1). This daily
calibration was then used to predict Ta in grid cells in the study
domain without Ta measurements, but with available Ts measurements. To
fill in cells or days when no Ts measurements were available, a
generalized additive mixed model was fitted with a smooth function of
latitude and longitude of the grid-cell centroid (model 2). The
performance of the estimated Ta was validated by tenfold
cross-validation. Out-of-sample R2 was found to be very high (R2 =
0.947, yearly variation 0.933--0.958 for the years 2000--2011) for days
with available satellite Ts measurements. Excellent performance was also
observed, even in days with no available Ts data (R2 = 0.940, yearly
variation 0.902--0.962 for the years 2000--2011). More details are
published17 . By linking the ZIP code centroid to the nearest
temperature grid, we assigned the grid-cell temperature exposures to
each ZIP code. The predicted daily ambient temperatures allow us to
calculate, for each year and each ZIP code, the mean temperature for
summer (June--August), the mean temperature for winter
(December--February), the standard deviation of daily mean summertime
temperature, and the standard deviation of daily mean wintertime
temperature. We refer to these as summer mean temperature, winter mean
temperature; summer temperature variability and winter temperature
variability, respectively (see Supplementary Table 2 in Supplementary
Methods). Supplementary Table 2 also presents the distribution of the
spatial and temporal variations for the temperature variables.
Supplementary Table 3 in Supplementary Methods gives the correlation
coefficients between these explanatory variables. Covariates. Medicare
provides information on age, race and sex of all individuals. From the
US Census Bureau 2000, we obtained tabulated ZIP-code-level
socio-economic variables, including population density, percentage of
green space, percentage of the population (age ≥ 65) in poverty status,
and median value for owner-occupied housing units. In addition, based on
ZIP-code-level primary and secondary hospital admissions for lung
cancer, we calculated the long-term average hospital admission rate for
lung cancer in each ZIP code as a surrogate for smoking experience. The
census data were merged with individuals based on their ZIP code of
residence. County-level percentage of diabetes and percentage of lack of
physical activity, obtained from the CDC Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance survey for the entire country, were adjusted as well.

LETTERS Statistical methods. In our data set, one observation is created
for each Medicare participant for each year of follow-up, using the
Andersen--Gill formulation of survival analysis. Survival times were
calculated from enrolment date until death or 31 December 2008
(censoring), whichever came first. We considered the following possible
exposure indices: summer mean temperature, winter mean temperature,
summertime standard deviation of temperature and wintertime standard
deviation of temperature in each follow-up year. To separate the
independent associations of mortality with mean temperature and
temperature variability, all temperature-related indices were entered
into the models simultaneously and treated as time-varying exposures. We
applied extended Cox proportional hazard models (Proc PHREG, SAS 9.3),
which allow for time-varying covariates in survival analysis. The models
were adjusted for individual risk factors, including age, sex, race, and
ZIP-code-level covariates such as population density, percentage of
green space, percentage of the population below poverty level, median
value for owner-occupied housing units, and hospital admission rate for
lung cancer (a surrogate for smoking experience), as well as
county-level percentage of diabetes and percentage of lack of physical
activity. To adjust for time trend, we entered an indicator for each
year of follow-up. To allow for possible non-proportionality of hazard,
participants were stratified by sex, five-year age groups, and race
(white, black, and others), such that each sex/age/race group had its
own baseline hazard. We then assessed the association of mortality with
the four exposure indices. The analyses were also repeated without
mutual adjustment for seasonal mean temperatures and their standard
deviation (see Supplementary Table 4 in Supplementary Methods). To
separate the contribution of the spatial and temporal components of the
temperature variables, we fit a model with two terms for each
temperature variable. We defined each term as its mean in that ZIP code
over the entire study period, plus the difference (anomaly) from that
mean for the ith ZIP code in the tth follow-up year. With all eight
terms put in the model, the mean for each ZIP code captures purely
geographic contrasts, whereas the anomaly indicates the effects of
yearly variations within each ZIP code. The results are expressed as the
percentage increase in mortality for each ◦ C increase in an exposure
index, for spatial contrasts, annual anomalies and the overall effect
estimates. Percentage increases in mortality were also calculated for
per IQR (Interquartile Range; IQR = third quartile − first quartile)
increase, to reflect the current distribution of these variables. For
example, an 8.4% (95% CI: 7.3, 9.6%) increase of mortality was observed
for per IQR increase of yearly anomaly of summer mean temperature. This
result can be interpreted as that, within a ZIP code, the risk of death
in a relatively warm summer (third quartile in the studied period) was
8.4% higher than in a relatively cold summer (first quartile). A
sensitivity analysis controlling for the number of heat waves in each
ZIP code in each year was performed as well. We also examined age
(defined as ≥75 yr and 65--74 yr), sex, race (white, black, Asian,
Hispanic, and other) and population density (less than 33th percentile,
rural, and otherwise urban) as effect modifiers for both spatial
contrasts and temperature anomalies, respectively, by adding interaction
terms between such variables and each of the eight temperature indices
in the model.

References 25. Kloog, I., Coull, B. A., Zanobetti, A., Koutrakis, P. &
Schwartz, J. D. Acute and chronic effects of particles on hospital
admissions in New-England. PLoS ONE 7, e34664 (2012).

NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE | www.nature.com/natureclimatechange

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved


