ehp

http://www.ehponline.org

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PERSPECTIVES

Low-Concentration PM2.5 and Mortality: Estimating Acute and Chronic
Effects in a Population-Based Study Liuhua Shi, Antonella Zanobetti,
Itai Kloog, Brent A. Coull, Petros Koutrakis, Steven J. Melly, and Joel
D. Schwartz http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1409111 Received: 22 August
2014 Accepted: 13 May 2015 Advance Publication: 3 June 2015

This article will be available in a 508-conformant form upon final
publication. If you require a 508-conformant version before then, please
contact ehp508@niehs.nih.gov. Our staff will work with you to assess and
meet your accessibility needs within 3 working days.

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Low-Concentration PM2.5 and Mortality: Estimating Acute and Chronic
Effects in a Population-Based Study Liuhua Shi1, Antonella Zanobetti1,
Itai Kloog1,2, Brent A. Coull3, Petros Koutrakis1, Steven J. Melly1, and
Joel D. Schwartz1

1

Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston,

Massachusetts, USA; 2Department of Geography and Environmental
Development, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel;
3Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Address correspondence to Liuhua Shi, Department of Environmental
Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Landmark Center, 401
Park Drive, Boston, MA 02215 USA. Telephone: 339-221-8486. E-mail:
lis678@mail.harvard.edu Short title: Low-concentration PM2.5 and
mortality Acknowledgments: This study was funded by NIEHS ES000002, and
by EPA grant RD83479801. The authors thank Pengfei Liu and Yan Wang for
fruitful discussions. Disclaimer: If captured, the Administrator of EPA
will deny all knowledge of our existence. Competing financial interests:
The authors have no competing financial interests.

1

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Abstract Background: Both short- and long-term exposures to fine
particulate matter (PM2.5) are associated with mortality. However,
whether the associations exist below the new EPA standards (12 µg/m3 of
annual average PM2.5, 35 µg/m3 daily) is unclear. In addition, it is not
clear whether results of previous time series studies (fit in larger
cities) and cohort studies (fit in convenience samples) are
generalizable to the general population. Objectives: To estimate the
effects of low-concentration PM2.5 on mortality. Methods: High
resolution (1 × 1 km) daily PM2.5 predictions, derived from satellite
aerosol optical depth retrievals, were employed. Poisson regressions
were applied to the Medicare population (age>=65) in New England to
simultaneously estimate the acute and chronic effects, with mutual
adjustment for short- and long-term exposure, as well as area-based
confounders. Models were also restricted to annual concentrations below
10 µg/m3 or daily concentrations below 30 µg/m3. Results: PM2.5 was
associated with increased mortality. In the cohort, 2.14% (95% CI: 1.38,
2.89%) and 7.52% (95% CI: 1.95, 13.40%) increases were estimated for
each 10 µg/m3 increase in short- (2 day) and long-term (1 year)
exposures, respectively. The associations still held for analyses
restricted to low-concentration PM2.5 exposures. The corresponding
estimates were 2.14% (95% CI: 1.34, 2.95%) and 9.28% (95% CI: 0.76,
18.52%). Penalized spline models of long-term exposure indicated a
higher slope for mortality in association with exposures above versus
below 6 µg/m3. In contrast, the association between short-term exposure
and mortality appeared to be linear across the entire exposure
distribution.

2

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Conclusions: Using a mutually adjusted model, we estimated significant
acute and chronic effects of PM2.5 exposures below current EPA
standards. These findings suggest that improving air quality below
current standards may benefit public health.

3

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Introduction Many studies have found association between fine
particulate matter (PM with aerodynamic diameter < 2.5 µm [PM2.5]) and
increased mortality (Dockery et al. 1993; Schwartz 1994; Pope III et al.
2002; Franklin et al. 2007; Zanobetti and Schwartz 2009). Biological
evidence has been established for plausible mechanisms between PM2.5 and
mortality, such as increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia and
thrombotic processes, increased system inflammation and oxidative
stress, increased blood pressure, decreased plaque stability, and lower
lung function, among others (Downs et al. 2007; Gauderman et al. 2004;
Suwa et al. 2002; Brook et al. 2009; Gurgueira et al. 2002; Yue et al.
2007). Based on evidence from epidemiological and toxicological studies
(Chen and Nadziejko 2005; Furuyama et al. 2006; Ohtoshi et al. 1998),
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) were implemented for fine
particulate matter. For example, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) revised the fine particle NAAQS in the years of 1997, 2006, and
2012, in order to protect public health (EPA 1997; EPA 2006; EPA 2013).
Further changes in the standards require additional studies to elucidate
whether health effects occur at levels below current annual and daily
EPA NAAQS of 12 and 35 µg/m3, respectively. The Clean Air Act requires
EPA to review national air quality standards every five years to
determine whether they should be retained or revised (United States Code
Title 42, Chapter 85), thus whether the relationship continues below the
current standards is of great interest and importance. Previous studies
have generally focused on either long-term (Hart et al. 2011; Puett et
al. 2009; Schwartz 2000; Jerrett et al. 2005) or short-term (Schwartz
and Dockery 1992; Katsouyanni et al. 1997; Dominici et al. 2006; Samoli
et al. 2008) exposures across the entire range of PM2.5 concentration.
In the case of time series analyses of short-term exposures, the

4

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

need to ensure the relevance of the monitoring data and sufficient
population for power has limited analyses to larger cities, and hence
exurbs, smaller cities, and rural areas are not generally represented in
the literature. This may compromise the generalizability of the results.
In addition, there is spatial variability in PM2.5 concentrations within
cities that time series studies generally have not taken into account,
introducing exposure measurement error (Lepeule et al. 2012; Laden et
al. 2006). Chronic effects studies began using comparisons across cities
of mortality experiences of a cohort living in various communities and
the monitored air pollutant concentrations in those communities (Dockery
et al. 1993; Pope et al. 1995). Again, these suffered from exposure
error due to failure to capture within city spatial variability in
exposure. Since the geographic exposure gradient is the exposure
contrast in these studies, the failure to capture within city contrasts
leads to classical measurement error, with expected downward bias.
Studies with e.g., land use regression estimates of exposure have
generally reported larger effect sizes (Puett et al. 2009; Miller et al.
2007). Previous cohort studies have not controlled for the acute effects
of particles when estimating chronic effects, raising the question of
whether there are independent chronic effects that represent more than
the cumulative effects of acute responses. In general, existing study
cohorts are not representative of the population. For example, the
American Cancer Society (ACS) cohort has higher education than the US
population as a whole (Stellman and Garfinkel 1986). Hence, there have
been few population-based cohort studies conducted until recently (Kloog
et al. 2013). Several time series studies examined the
concentration-response relationship between PM2.5 and mortality below
concentrations of 100 µg/m3. They generally report linear concentration-

5

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

response (Samoli et al. 2008; Schwartz and Zanobetti 2000). However,
there have been few studies focusing on exposures below the current
daily EPA standard of 35 µg/m3. More studies have examined the shape of
the concentration-response curve for long-term exposure versus
short-term exposure, but they have mostly not covered population based
cohorts, or included very low exposures (Schwartz et al. 2008; Crouse et
al. 2012). We recently presented a new hybrid method of assessing
temporally- and spatially-resolved PM2.5 exposure for epidemiological
studies by incorporating 1 × 1 km resolution satelliteretrieved Aerosol
optical Depth (AOD) measurements, combined with traditional land use
terms, meteorological variables and their interactions (Kloog et al.
2014a). This approach allows for predicting daily PM2.5 concentrations
at a 1 × 1 km spatial resolution throughout the New England area. We
also validated our models performance in rural areas: Ten-fold
crossvalidation of our model in rural areas (using the IMPROVE stations)
resulted in a CV R2 of 0.92. Further details have been published (Kloog
et al. 2014a). The present study aims to simultaneously estimate acute
and chronic health effects of PM2.5, in a population-based Medicare
cohort (age > 65) encompassing the New England region. It uses high
spatial resolution exposure estimates based on satellite measurements
that are available across the region and not just in limited locations.
To make this study relevant to future assessments of current EPA
standards, we repeated the analysis after restricting the data to
longterm exposures (365-day moving average) below 10 µg/m3, and repeated
the time series analysis of short-term exposures after restricting data
to two day average exposures below 30 µg/m3.

6

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Methods Study domain: The spatial domain of our study included the New
England area, comprising the states of Connecticut, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont (Figure 1A).
Exposure data: Novel models for predicting daily PM2.5 were previously
reported incorporating AOD and land use data for the New England region
(Kloog et al. 2011). Previous papers have shown that using actual
physical measurements in our prediction models improves predictive
accuracy over comparable land use or spatial smoothing models (Kloog et
al. 2011). With AOD retrieved by Multi-Angle Implementation of
Atmospheric Correction (MAIAC) algorithm, a similar approach was applied
for estimating daily PM2.5 exposures in New England at a spatial
resolution of 1 × 1 km (Kloog et al. 2014a). In this study, the same
PM2.5 exposure predictions were employed. In brief, we calibrated the
AOD-PM2.5 relationship on each day during the study period (2003-2008)
using data from grid cells with both ground PM2.5 monitors and AOD
measurements (stage 1), and used inverse probability weighting to
address selection bias due to non-random missingness patterns in the AOD
measurements. We then used the AOD-PM2.5 relationship to predict PM2.5
concentrations for grid cells that lacked monitors but had available AOD
measurement data (stage 2). Finally, we used a generalized additive
mixed model (GAMM) with spatial smoothing and a random intercept for
each 1 × 1 km grid cell to impute data for grid cell/days when AOD
measurements were not available (stage 3). The performance of the
estimated PM2.5 was validated by ten-fold cross-validation. High
out-of-sample R2 (R2=0.89, year to year variation 0.88 - 0.90 for the
years 2003-2008) was found for days with available AOD data. Excellent
performance held even in cells/days with no available AOD (R2=0.89, year

7

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

to year variation 0.87 - 0.91 for the years 2003-2008). The 1 km model
has better spatial (0.87) and temporal (0.87) out of sample R2 than the
previous 10 km model (0.78 and 0.84 respectively). Details of the PM2.5
prediction models are found in Kloog et al (Kloog et al. 2014a). Figure
1A shows an example of mean PM2.5 concentrations in 2004 at a 1 × 1 km
spatial resolution across New England. By averaging our estimated daily
exposures at each location we generated long-term exposures. Figure 1B
(a subset of the study area) shows that spatial variability exists even
for daily data, and is not identical to the long-term pattern shown in
Figure 1A. That is, there is space-time variation in the PM2.5 exposure
captured in this analysis, but not in previous time series analyses.
Because the deaths were coded at the ZIP code level, both long- and
short-term predictions were matched to ZIP codes by linking the ZIP code
centroid to nearest PM2.5 grid, using ArcGIS (ESRI, Redlines, CA) and
SAS (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Traditionally, studies of the acute air
pollution effects have controlled for temperature using values taken
from the nearest airport. This approach is not feasible for the entire
region, since too many residences are distant from airports. In
addition, there is spatio-temporal variation in temperature as well. We
have used similar models of satellite data to fit models for temperature
in New England on a 1 km temperature data estimated from surface
temperature measured by satellites (Kloog et al. 2014b). To our
knowledge, such fine control for temperature has not previously been
used in air pollution epidemiology. Mortality data: Individual mortality
records were obtained from the US Medicare program for all residents
aged 65 and older for all available years during 2003-2008 (CMS). The
MEDICARE cohort was used because of availability of ZIP code of
residence data, whereas

8

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

National Center for Health Statistics mortality data is only available
on a county level. Additionally, prior studies found that elderly people
are more susceptible to the effects of particulate matter (Pope 3rd
2000). The Medicare beneficiary denominator file from the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid services (CMS) lists all beneficiaries enrolled in
the Medicare feefor-service (FFS), and contains information on
beneficiaries' eligibility and enrollment in Medicare, and the date of
death (CMS). The Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MEDPAR)
inpatient data includes information on age, gender, race, ZIP code of
residence, and one record for each hospital admission (CMS). Daily
mortality was first aggregated by ZIP code, and then matched with the
corresponding PM2.5 exposure. We summarized the mortality data by ZIP
code and day because that is the finest resolution of address we can
obtain. Since the mortality datasets did not include changes of
residence, we had to assume that the subjects lived at their current
address over the study period. Covariates: We used daily 1 km
temperature data estimated from surface temperature measured by
satellites (Kloog et al. 2014b). All socio-economic variables were
obtained through the U.S. Census Bureau 2000 Census Summary File 3,
which includes social, economic, and housing characteristics [United
States Census Bureau (USCB) 2000]. ZIP code tabulation area level
socio-economic variables, including race, education, and median
household income, were used. In addition, county-level percent of people
who currently smoke every day from the CDC Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance survey for the entire country was adjusted as well (CDC
2013). Dummy variables were used to control for day of the week.
Statistical Models: Conventionally, the acute effects of air pollution
are estimated by Poisson log-linear models and the chronic effects are
estimated by Cox proportional hazard models (Laden et al. 2006; Kloog et
al. 2013). Laird and Oliver pointed out the equivalence of

9

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

the likelihood of a proportional hazard model with piecewise constant
hazard for each year of follow-up and a Poisson regression with a dummy
variable for each year of follow-up (Laird and Olivier 1981). We have
taken advantage of this to generalize from dummy variables for each year
to a spline of time to represent the baseline hazard, and to aggregate
subjects into counts per person time at risk and obtained a mixed
Poisson regression model (Kloog et al. 2012). This approach allows one
to model the rate of death as a function of both long- and short-term
exposures simultaneously. By doing so, we achieve the equivalence of a
separate time series analysis for each ZIP code, greatly reducing the
exposure error in that part of the model, while simultaneously
conducting a survival analysis on the participants, and also are able to
estimate the independent effects of both exposures. Most time series
studies have reported stronger associations with acute exposures when
exposures are defined as mean PM2.5 on the day of death and the previous
day (lag01), compared with mean PM2.5 on the current day only, or for
exposures with longer lags (Schwartz et al. 1996; Schwartz 2004). We
used the lag01 average for our main analysis, but performed a
sensitivity analysis on that choice. Long-term exposure was calculated
as the 365-day moving average ending on date of death so that our
results were comparable with previous studies (Lepeule et al. 2012;
Schwartz et al. 2008). Short-term exposure was defined as the difference
between the 2day average and the long-term average, ensuring the acute
and chronic effects are independent. We subtracted the long-term average
from the short-term to avoid collinearity issues, and to ensure that
differences between ZIP codes in PM2.5 at a given time do not contribute
to the shortterm effect estimate. Hence, the short-term effect cannot be
confounded by variables that differ across ZIP codes.

10

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Specifically, we fit a Poisson survival analysis with a logarithmic link
function and a log (population) offset term and modeled the expected
daily death counts (µit) in the ith ZIP code on the tth day as follows:
log(µit) = λi + β1 PMit + β2 ∆PMit + λ(t) + temporal covariates +
spatial covariates + offset

[1]

Where λi is a random intercept for each ZIP code, PMit is the 365-day
moving average ending on day t in ZIP code i, ∆PMit is the deviation of
the 2-day average from its long-term average (PMit) in ZIP code i, λ(t)
is a smooth function of time, temporal covariates are temperature and
day of the week, spatial covariates are socio-economic factors defined
at ZIP code level (percent of people without high school education,
percent of white people, median household income) and smoking data at
the county level. Additionally, a Quasipoisson model was used to control
for possible overdispersion (Ver Hoef and Boveng 2007). λ(t) was
estimated with a natural cubic spline with 5 degrees of freedom (df) per
year, to control for time and season trends. The specific temporal and
spatial covariates we used were: a natural cubic spline for temperature
with 3 df in total; a categorical variable for day of the week; linear
variables for percent of people without high school education, percent
of white people, median household income, and percent of people who
currently smoke every day. The number of deaths per ZIP code area over
the study period (2003-2008) averaged 319 with a standard deviation of
430. Since the outcome is counts, we cannot adjust for age and sex as in
a Cox model. Instead we adjust for variables that vary by ZIP code. The
analyses were also repeated without mutual adjustment for short- and
long-term PM2.5. We modeled the association between all-cause mortality
and PM2.5 at low doses in which the person-time at risk in each year of
follow-up in each ZIP code was used as the offsets. We also

11

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

conducted effect modification by population size, by choosing the median
(4,628) of ZIP code level total population as the cutoff between urban
and rural areas. Estimating the effects of low-level PM2.5: For full
cohort analyses with 10,938,852 personyears of follow-up, all observed
deaths were used. To estimate effects at low levels of exposure we
carried out restricted analyses; we conducted one analysis restricted to
annual exposures below 10 µg/m3, below the current annual PM2.5 NAAQS of
12 µg/m3; and another restricted to observations with short-term
exposure below 30 µg/m, below the current daily PM2.5 NAAQS of 35 µg/m3.
After these exclusions, the chronic analyses were restricted to 268,050
deaths out of 551,024 deaths in total, and the acute analyses to 422,637
deaths. Assessing the dose-response relationship: For both the acute and
chronic analyses, we fit penalized regression splines in the restricted
analyses to estimate the shape of the dose-response below current EPA
standards. The degrees of freedom of the penalized splines for PM2.5 was
estimated by generalized cross validation (GCV). Results Table 1
presents a summary of the predicted exposures for both the short-and
long-term PM2.5 exposure across all grid cells in the study area. Table
2 presents the estimated percent change in all-cause mortality with 95%
CIs for a 10 µg/m3 increase for both short- and long-term PM2.5 in the
restricted and full cohort. For the restricted population, we found an
estimated 9.28% increase in mortality (95% CI: 0.76, 18.52%) for every
10 µg/m3 increase in long-term PM2.5 exposure. For every 10 µg/m3
increase in shortterm PM2.5 exposure, a 2.14% increase in mortality (95%
CI: 1.34, 2.95%) was observed. For long-term exposure, the effect
estimates were smaller when higher pollution days were included

12

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

(7.52%; 95% CI: 1.95, 13.40%), suggesting larger slopes between
low-concentration long-term PM2.5 and mortality. Without mutual
adjustment, lower estimates were found for both acute and chronic
effects, compared to those with mutual adjustment. In full cohort
analyses, 2.08% (95% CI: 1.32, 2.84%) and 6.46% (95% CI: 0.93, 12.30%)
increase in mortality was found for each 10 µg/m3 increase in short- and
long-term PM2.5, respectively. In restricted analyses, the corresponding
effect estimates were 2.07% (95% CI: 1.27, 2.89%) and 7.16% (95% CI:
-1.23, 16.27%), respectively. Our results were robust to the choice of
lag period for acute exposure. We analyzed other averaging periods
(Figure 2): for example, lag0 (day of death exposure) and lag04 (a
moving average of day of death exposure and previous 4-day exposure).
For the acute effects, we found a significant but smaller association
for lag0 PM2.5 (1.71%; 95% CI: 1.09, 2.34%) or lag04 PM2.5 (1.76%; 95%
CI: 0.72, 2.81%) compared to lag01 analysis. The lag period used for
short-term exposure did not affect estimates of chronic effects. For
example, estimated increases in mortality with a 10 µg/m3 increase in
long-term PM2.5 were 7.35% (95% CI: 1.79, 13.21%) and 7.25% (95% CI:
1.69, 13.12%) when short-term PM2.5 was classified using lag0 or lag04,
respectively. We also examined effect modification by population size.
In the full cohort, a significant interaction for chronic effects was
found (p < 0.01), with a higher effect of 12.56% (95% CI: 5.71, 19.85%)
in urban areas compared to 3.21% (95% CI: -2.92, 9.72%) in rural areas.
Such a significant interaction, however, was not observed in the
restricted analysis (p = 0.16). Estimates were 14.27% (95% CI: 3.19,
26.53%) and 5.48% (95% CI: -4.21, 16.16%) in urban and rural areas,
respectively. For the short-term exposure, population size did not
modify the acute effects neither in full cohort nor in restricted
analyses (p = 0.74 and 0.46, respectively).

13

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

In our penalized spline model for long-term exposure below the cutoff of
10 µg/m3 (Figure 3a), we found a non-linear relationship between
long-term PM2.5 and mortality. The association was linear with evidence
of a lower slope below 6 µg/m3. However a large confidence interval was
observed; hence we could not be confident whether the slope of the
dose-response curve for long-term exposures below 6 µg/m3 changed. When
examining the shape of the dose-response for chronic effects, both a
linear term for short-term exposure (the difference) and a penalized
spline for long-term average exposure were included in the model,
resulting in a penalized spline with a df of 1.71. In contrast, we only
included the 2-day average in the penalized spline model of acute
effects, to provide a more interpretable dose-response relationship
(Figure 3b). Results of this analysis indicated a linear association
across the exposure distribution, but we could not be certain about the
shape of slope for acute effects below 3 µg/m3. Discussion Applying the
predicted daily PM2.5 with 1 km spatial resolution from our novel hybrid
models, we observed that both short- and long-term PM2.5 exposure were
significantly associated with all-cause mortality among residents aged
65 and above in New England, even when restricted to ZIP codes and times
with annual exposures below 10 µg/m3 or with daily exposure below 30
µg/m3. Hence the association of particle exposure with mortality exists
for concentrations below current US, WHO (10 µg/m3 of annual average
PM2.5, 25 µg/m3 daily) or EU (25 µg/m3 of annual average PM2.5)
standards (WHO; EU). Notably, this analysis includes all areas in New
England and all Medicare enrollees aged 65 and above, and provides
chronic effect estimates that are independent of acute effects. Based on
a penalized spline model, the positive dose-response relationship
between chronic exposure and mortality appears to be linear for PM2.5
concentrations down to 6 µg/m3, with a positive (though weaker and less
precise) dose-

14

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

response slope continuing below this level. This lack of power is likely
due to the small population exposed in the areas with annual PM2.5 below
6 µg/m3, which were quite rural. For the acute effect, we found a 2.14%
(95% CI: 1.38 to 2.89%) increase in all-cause mortality per 10 µg/m3
increment in PM2.5 for the full cohort of our study, which is higher
than the effect size of most studies using city averages from monitors.
For instance, in a US national study by Zanobetti and Schwartz
(Zanobetti and Schwartz 2009), the effect size was found to be 0.98%
(95% CI: 0.75, 1.22%). Similar results have also been found in a review
study, where researchers have demonstrated the overall summary estimate
was 1.04% (95% CI: 0.52, 1.56%) per 10 µg/m3 increment in PM2.5
(Atkinson et al. 2014). Most previous studies had exposure data with
lower spatial resolution (citywide average, not ZIP code), which
introduces exposure measurement error and likely results in downward
bias in estimates; these results (for the acute effect) are consistent
with such a phenomena. Our restricted study estimated a 2.14% (95% CI:
1.34, 2.95%) increase in all-cause mortality per 10 µg/m3 increment in
PM2.5, close to the effect size of the full cohort study, possibly
because the sample size of the restricted study for acute effect is
close to that of the full cohort. That is, the EPA daily standard (35
µg/m3) was almost never exceeded in this study. In addition, lower
effect estimates for short-term exposure were observed with mutual
adjustment for both full cohort and restricted analyses. This finding
has important implications for the interpretation of previous studies
without such mutual adjustment. For the chronic effect, the effect
estimate in our full cohort study is consistent with previous studies
with comparable sample sizes (Lepeule et al. 2012; Laden et al. 2006;
Hoek et al. 2013). For example, ACS study comprised of 500,000 adults
from 51 US cities, reported a 6% (95% CI: 2, 11%) increase in all-cause
mortality for 10 µg/m3 increment in PM2.5 (Pope III et al. 2002). A
study of 13.2 million elderly Medicare recipients across the east USA
found a 6.8% (95% CI:

15

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

4.9, 8.7%) increase in all-cause mortality for 10 µg/m3 increment in
PM2.5 (Zeger et al. 2008). When we restricted our analysis to annual
concentrations below 10 µg/m3, a larger slope of 9.28% (95% CI: 0.76,
18.52%) increase per 10 µg/m3 was observed. Our findings suggest a
steeper slope at low concentrations among those aged 65 years and older.
This may also reflect particle composition. The sources and composition
of the particles may differ on lower pollution days from that seen on
high pollution days, which are probably more impacted by secondary
aerosols. Compared to the full cohort, the effect estimate of the
restricted analysis was closer to the estimates in the published
literature reporting higher slopes, such as the ESCAPE study, the Six
City study and Women's Health Initiative study (Beelen et al. 2014;
Puett et al. 2008). Lower effect estimates were also observed for
chronic effect without mutual adjustment. To the best of our knowledge,
this study is the first of its kind restricting the exposure and
exploring the dose-response relationship between PM2.5 and mortality
below the current EPA standards (12 µg/m3 of annual average PM2.5, 35
µg/m3 daily). Moreover, the use of the MEDICARE cohort means we are
studying the entire population of Medicare enrollees over 65, and not a
convenience sample. In addition, temperature was also controlled on the
1 × 1 km fine geographic scale. The acute and chronic effects for
analyses restricted to low exposure of PM2.5 are similar or even higher
compared to those of the full cohort analyses. These results indicate
that the adverse health effects of PM2.5 are at least retained, if not
strengthened, at low levels of exposure. However, the findings from the
penalized spline model do not support a stronger association at the
lowest range of PM2.5 concentrations. This finding provides
epidemiological evidence for the reevaluation of EPA guidelines and
standards, though more evidence are needed to confirm the association
below 6 µg/m3.

16

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

The Poisson survival analysis applied in this study provides new
opportunities in assessing acute and chronic effects simultaneously. As
shown in our analysis, the chronic effect estimate was much larger than
the acute effect estimate, after controlling for the acute estimate,
indicating there was chronic effect of PM2.5, which cannot be solely
explained by the short-term exposure. Another key component of this
study is that the application of high spatial- (1 × 1 km) and temporal-
(daily) resolution of PM2.5 concentrations to some extents reduced
exposure error. The out-of-sample R2 is higher than that for the
predictions with 10 × 10 km spatial resolution. A potential limitation
is the limited availability of individual level confounders, such as
smoking status, which could bias the health effect estimates. We were
able to control for ZIP code level education, median income, race and
county level smoking data. However, a study by Brochu et al. reported
that census tract level socioeconomic indicators were uncorrelated with
PM2.5 on the subregional and local scale, providing some assurance that
confounding by SES may not be much of an issue (Brochu et al. 2011).
These results suggest that those variables may not confound the
association, but the inability to control for them remains an issue.
Another limitation is that we did not examine other pollutants such as
O3 or NO2 due to lack of data at the same spatial level as PM2.5. In
conclusion, the acute and chronic effects of low-concentration PM2.5
were examined for Medicare population using a comprehensive exposure
dataset from a satellite-based prediction model. Our findings show that
both short- and long-term exposure to PM2.5 were associated with
all-cause mortality, even for exposure levels not exceeding the newly
revised EPA standards, suggesting that adverse health effects occur at
low levels of fine particles. The policy implication is that improving
the air quality below the current EPA standards can still yield health
benefit.

17

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

References Atkinson R, Kang S, Anderson H, Mills I, Walton H. 2014.
Epidemiological time series studies of pm2. 5 and daily mortality and
hospital admissions: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Thorax:
thoraxjnl-2013-204492. Beelen R, Raaschou-Nielsen O, Stafoggia M,
Andersen ZJ, Weinmayr G, Hoffmann B, et al. 2014. Effects of long-term
exposure to air pollution on natural-cause mortality: An analysis of 22
european cohorts within the multicentre ESCAPE project. Lancet
383:785-795. Brochu PJ, Yanosky JD, Paciorek CJ, Schwartz J, Chen JT,
Herrick RF, et al. 2011. Particulate air pollution and socioeconomic
position in rural and urban areas of the northeastern united states. Am
J Public Health 101 (Suppl 1):S224-S230. Brook RD, Urch B, Dvonch JT,
Bard RL, Speck M, Keeler G, et al. 2009. Insights into the mechanisms
and mediators of the effects of air pollution exposure on blood pressure
and vascular function in healthy humans. Hypertension 54:659-667. CDC
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2013. Behavioral risk
factor surveillance system. Available:
http://www.cdc.gov/brfss/annual\_data/annual\_2013.html [assessed 15
November 2013]. Chen LC, Nadziejko C. 2005. Effects of subchronic
exposures to concentrated ambient particles (caps) in mice: V. Caps
exacerbate aortic plaque development in hyperlipidemic mice. Inhal
toxicol 17:217-224. CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services).
Medicare Program. Available:
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-General-Information/MedicareGenInfo/index.html
[assessed 15 November2013]. CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services). Denominator File. Available:
http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Files-forOrder/IdentifiableDataFiles/DenominatorFile.html
[assessed 15 November2013]. CMS (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services). Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MEDPAR) File.
Available:
http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-andSystems/Files-for-Order/IdentifiableDataFiles/MedicareProviderAnalysisandReviewFile.html
[assessed 15 November2013]. United States Code Title 42, Chapter 85. Air
pollution prevention and control. Available:
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/42 [accessed 9 December 2013]

18

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Crouse DL, Peters PA, van Donkelaar A, Goldberg MS, Villeneuve PJ, Brion
O, et al. 2012. Risk of nonaccidental and cardiovascular mortality in
relation to long-term exposure to low concentrations of fine particulate
matter: A canadian national-level cohort study. Environ Health Persp
120:708-714. Dockery DW, Pope CA, Xu X, Spengler JD, Ware JH, Fay ME, et
al. 1993. An association between air pollution and mortality in six us
cities. New Engl J Med 329:1753-1759. Dominici F, Peng RD, Bell ML, Pham
L, McDermott A, Zeger SL, et al. 2006. Fine particulate air pollution
and hospital admission for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. Jama
295:1127-1134. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1997. 40 CFR part
50 (National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter; Final
Rules). Available:
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/oarpg/t1/fr\_notices/pmnaaqs.pdf [accessed 18
July 1997] EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 2006. 40 CFR part 50
(National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter; Final
Rules).Available:
http://www.epa.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR2006-10-17/pdf/06-8477.pdf [accessed 17
October 2006] EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 2013. 40 CFR parts
50, 51, 52 et al. (National Ambient Air Quality Standards for
Particulate Matter; Final Rules). Available:
http://www.epa.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-01-15/pdf/2012-30946.pdf [accessed
15 January 2013] EU (European Union). Air Quality Standards. Available:
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/air/quality/standards.htm [assessed 15
November2013]. Franklin M, Zeka A, Schwartz J. 2007. Association between
pm2. 5 and all-cause and specificcause mortality in 27 us communities. J
Expo Sci Env Epid 17:279-287. Furuyama A, Hirano S, Koike E, Kobayashi
T. 2006. Induction of oxidative stress and inhibition of plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 production in endothelial cells following exposure
to organic extracts of diesel exhaust particles and urban fine
particles. Arch Toxicol 80:154162. Gauderman WJ, Avol E, Gilliland F,
Vora H, Thomas D, Berhane K, et al. 2004. The effect of air pollution on
lung development from 10 to 18 years of age. New Engl J Med
351:10571067.

19

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Gurgueira SA, Lawrence J, Coull B, Murthy GK, González-Flecha B. 2002.
Rapid increases in the steady-state concentration of reactive oxygen
species in the lungs and heart after particulate air pollution
inhalation. Environ Health Persp 110:749-755. Hoek G, Krishnan RM,
Beelen R, Peters A, Ostro B, Brunekreef B, et al. 2013. Long-term air
pollution exposure and cardio-respiratory mortality: A review. Environ
Health 12:1-16. Katsouyanni K, Touloumi G, Spix C, Schwartz J, Balducci
F, Medina S, et al. 1997. Short-term effects of ambient sulphur dioxide
and particulate matter on mortality in 12 european cities: Results from
time series data from the aphea project. Air pollution and health: A
european approach. BMJ: Brit Med J 314:1658-1663. Kloog I, Koutrakis P,
Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J. 2011. Assessing temporally and spatially
resolved pm< sub> 2.5 exposures for epidemiological studies using
satellite aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos Environ
45:6267-6275. Kloog I, Coull BA, Zanobetti A, Koutrakis P, Schwartz JD.
2012. Acute and chronic effects of particles on hospital admissions in
new-england. PLoS ONE 7:e34664. Kloog I, Ridgway B, Koutrakis P, Coull
BA, Schwartz JD. 2013. Long-and short-term exposure to pm2. 5 and
mortality: Using novel exposure models. Epidemiology 24:555-561. Kloog
I, Chudnovsky A, C. JA, Francesco N, Koutrakis P, Coull B, et al. 2014a.
A new hybrid spatio-temporal model for estimating daily multi-year pm2.5
concentrations across northeastern USA using high resolution aerosol
optical depth data. Atmos Environ 95: 581590. Kloog I, Nordio F, Coull
BA, Schwartz J. 2014b. Predicting spatiotemporal mean air temperature
using modis satellite surface temperature measurements across the
northeastern USA. Remote Sens Environ 150:132-139. Laden F, Schwartz J,
Speizer FE, Dockery DW. 2006. Reduction in fine particulate air
pollution and mortality. Am J Resp Crit Care 173:667-672. Laird N,
Olivier D. 1981. Covariance analysis of censored survival data using
log-linear analysis techniques. J Am Stat Assoc 76:231-240. Lepeule J,
Laden F, Dockery D, Schwartz J. 2012. Chronic exposure to fine particles
and mortality: An extended follow-up of the harvard six cities study
from 1974 to 2009. Environ Health Persp 120:965-970.

20

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Miller KA, Siscovick DS, Sheppard L, Shepherd K, Sullivan JH, Anderson
GL, et al. 2007. Long-term exposure to air pollution and incidence of
cardiovascular events in women. New Engl J Med 356:447-458. Pope 3rd C.
2000. Epidemiology of fine particulate air pollution and human health:
Biologic mechanisms and who's at risk? Environ Health Persp 108:713-723.
Pope CA, Thun MJ, Namboodiri MM, Dockery DW, Evans JS, Speizer FE, et
al. 1995. Particulate air pollution as a predictor of mortality in a
prospective study of u.S. Adults. Am J Resp Crit Care 151:669-674. Pope
III CA, Burnett RT, Thun MJ, Calle EE, Krewski D, Ito K, et al. 2002.
Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term exposure to fine
particulate air pollution. Jama 287:1132-1141. Puett RC, Schwartz J,
Hart JE, Yanosky JD, Speizer FE, Suh H, et al. 2008. Chronic particulate
exposure, mortality, and coronary heart disease in the nurses' health
study. Am J Epidemiol 168:1161-1168. Puett RC, Hart JE, Yanosky JD,
Paciorek C, Schwartz J, Suh H, et al. 2009. Chronic fine and coarse
particulate exposure, mortality, and coronary heart disease in the
nurses' health study. Environ Health Persp 117:1697-1702. Samoli E, Peng
R, Ramsay T, Pipikou M, Touloumi G, Dominici F, et al. 2008. Acute
effects of ambient particulate matter on mortality in europe and north
america: Results from the aphena study. Environ Health Persp
116:1480-1486. Schwartz J, Dockery DW, Neas LM. 1996. Is daily mortality
associated specifically with fine particles? J Air Waste Manage
46:927-939. Schwartz J. 2000. Harvesting and long term exposure effects
in the relation between air pollution and mortality. Am J Epidemiol
151:440-448. Schwartz J, Zanobetti A. 2000. Using meta-smoothing to
estimate dose-response trends across multiple studies, with application
to air pollution and daily death. Epidemiology 11:666-672. Schwartz J.
2004. Is the association of airborne particles with daily deaths
confounded by gaseous air pollutants? An approach to control by
matching. Environ Health Persp 112:557561.

21

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Schwartz J, Coull B, Laden F, Ryan L. 2008. The effect of dose and
timing of dose on the association between airborne particles and
survival. Environmental Health Perspectives: 6469. Stellman SD,
Garfinkel L. 1986. Smoking habits and tar levels in a new American
Cancer Society prospective study of 1.2 million men and women. Journal
of the National Cancer Institute 76(6): 1057-1063. Suwa T, Hogg JC,
Quinlan KB, Ohgami A, Vincent R, van Eeden SF. 2002. Particulate air
pollution induces progression of atherosclerosis. J Am Coll Cardiol
39:935-942. USCB (United States Census Bureau). 2000. Summary File 3 (SF
3). Available: http://www.census.gov/census2000/sumfile3.html [assessed
15 November2013]. Ver Hoef JM, Boveng PL. 2007. Quasi-Poisson vs.
negative binomial regression: how should we model overdispersed count
data? Ecology 88(11): 2766-2772. WHO (World Health Organization).
Ambient (outdoor) air quality and health. Available:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/ [assessed 15
November2013]. Yue W, Schneider A, Stölzel M, Rückerl R, Cyrys J, Pan X,
et al. 2007. Ambient source-specific particles are associated with
prolonged repolarization and increased levels of inflammation in male
coronary artery disease patients. Mutat Res-Fund Mol M 621:50-60.
Zanobetti A, Schwartz J. 2009. The effect of fine and coarse particulate
air pollution on mortality: A national analysis. Environ Health Persp
117:898-903. Zeger SL, Dominici F, McDermott A, Samet JM. 2008.
Mortality in the medicare population and chronic exposure to fine
particulate air pollution in urban centers (2000--2005). Environ Health
Persp 116:1614-1619.

 

 

22

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for PM2.5 exposure and temperature in
New England, 2003-2008. Covariate Lag01 PM2.5 (µg/m3 ) 1-year PM2.5
(µg/m3 ) Temperature (˚C)

Mean 8.21

SD 5.10

Min 0.00

Median Max 7.10 53.98

Range 53.98

Q1 4.60

Q3 10.65

IQR 6.05

8.12

2.28

0.08

8.15

20.22

20.14

6.22

10.00

3.78

9.24

6.50

-36.79

9.81

41.51

78.30

4.90

14.39

9.49

23

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Table 2. Percent increase in mortality (95% CI) for a 10 µg/m3 increase
for both short-term and long-term PM2.5 . PM2.5 exposure With mutual
adjustment Short term PM2.5 Long term PM2.5 Without mutual adjustment
Short term PM2.5 Long term PM2.5 a

Model

Percent increase

p-value

Low daily exposurea Full cohort Low chronic exposureb Full cohort

2.14 ± 0.81 2.14 ± 0.75 9.28 ± 8.88 7.52 ± 5.73

<.001 <.001 0.032 0.007

Low daily exposurea Full cohort Low chronic exposureb Full cohort

2.07 ± 0.80 2.08 ± 0.76 7.16 ± 8.75 6.46 ± 5.69

<.001 <.001 0.109 0.026

The analysis was restricted only to person time with daily PM2.5 less
than 30 µg/m3 (422,637 deaths).

b

The analysis was restricted only to person time with chronic PM2.5 less
than 10 µg/m3 (268,050 deaths).

The full cohort analysis had 551,024 deaths.

24

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Figure Legends Figure 1. A. Mean PM2.5 concentrations in 2004 at a high
resolution (1 × 1 km) across New England predicted by the AOD models. B.
Predicted PM2.5 concentrations at a 1 × 1 km grid for November 15, 2003.
Figure 2. Percent change in mortality per 10 µg/m3 increase in
short-term PM2.5 with different lags with mutual adjustment. Error bars
indicate the 95% CIs. Figure 3. The dose-response relationship between
long-term PM2.5 and mortality at low doses with mutual adjustment (a)
and the dose-response relationship between short-term PM2.5 and
mortality at low doses without mutual adjustment (b). Shaded areas
indicate the 95% CIs.

25

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Figure 1A.

26

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Figure 1B.

27

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Figure 2.

Percent Change in Mortality

2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0

lag0

lag1

lag2

lag3

lag4

lag01 lag02 lag03 lag04

PM 2.5 Lags

28

Environ Health Perspect DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1409111 Advance Publication:
Not Copyedited

Figure 3. 25 ( )

Percent Change in Mortality

20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 0

2

4

6

8

10

3

365-day moving average PM2.5 (µg/m )

14 ( )

Percent Change in Mortality

12 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Lag01 PM2.5 (µg/m3)

29


