Remote Sensing of Environment 163 (2015) 180--185

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Remote Sensing of Environment journal homepage:
www.elsevier.com/locate/rse

Assessment of PM2.5 concentrations over bright surfaces using MODIS
satellite observations Meytar Sorek-Hamer a, Itai Kloog b, Petros
Koutrakis c, Anthony W. Strawa d, Robert Chatﬁeld d, Ayala Cohen e,
William L. Ridgway f, David M. Broday a,⁎ a

Civil and Environmental Engineering, Haifa, Israel Department of
Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University, Beer
Sheva, Israel Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA d NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett
Field, CA, USA e Industrial and Management Engineering, Technion, Haifa,
Israel f Science Systems and Applications, Inc., 10210 Greenbelt Road,
Suite 600, Lanham, MD 20771, USA b c

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history: Received 6 January 2015 Received in revised form 10
March 2015 Accepted 13 March 2015 Available online 3 April 2015
Keywords: Dark Target Deep Blue Aerosol optical depth (AOD) MODIS PM2.5
Mixed effects models

a b s t r a c t Exposure to particles with an aerodynamic diameter
smaller than 2.5 μm (PM2.5) adversely impacts human health. In many
geographical regions where ground PM2.5 monitoring is spatially sparse
and unsuitable for environmental health inference, satellite remote
sensing can potentially be used for estimating human exposure to PM2.5.
However, retrieval of the aerosol optical depth (AOD) using the Dark
Target (DT) algorithm is uncertain in many regions worldwide (e.g.
western USA, the Middle East and central Asia) due to low
signal-to-noise ratio as a result of high surface reﬂectivity in the
spectral bands used by the algorithm. In this study we use the Deep Blue
(DB) algorithm as well as a combined DB-DT algorithm for AOD retrievals.
The AOD products are used to predict ground PM2.5 using mixed effects
models and the daily calibration approach. Models for the two study
areas (Israel and San Joaquin Valley, Central California) were developed
independently and then compared to each other. Using the AODDB within a
mixed effects model considerably improved PM2.5 prediction in high
reﬂectance regions, revealing in both study areas enhanced model
performance (in terms of both R2 and the root mean square prediction
error), signiﬁcant increase in the spatiotemporal availability of the
AOD product, and improved PM2.5 prediction relative to using AODDT
retrievals. © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction Exposure to particles with an aerodynamic diameter
   smaller than 2.5 μm (PM2.5) is commonly known to be associated with
   various health outcomes (Dominici, Peng, & Bell, 2006; Franklin,
   Zeka, & Schwartz, 2007; Kloog, Ridgway, Koutrakis, Coull, & Schwartz,
   2013; Schwartz, Dockery, & Neas, 1996; Zanobetti, Franklin,
   Koutrakis, & Schwartz, 2009). Typically, exposure to PM2.5 in such
   epidemiological studies is assessed using measurements from air
   quality monitoring stations. However, in many geographical areas
   ground PM2.5 monitoring networks are sparse and non-ideally deployed
   for environmental health studies. Satellite remote sensing can be
   used to assess PM2.5 in areas where surface monitoring is sparse or
   not available (Engel-Cox, Holloman, Coutant, & Hoff, 2004; Gupta &
   Christopher, 2008; Gupta et al., 2006; Koelemeijer, Homan, &
   Matthijsen, 2006; van Donkelaar et al., 2010). A common satellite
   product for predicting PM2.5 concentrations is the aerosol optical
   depth (AOD). AOD measures light extinction ⁎ Corresponding author at:
   Civil and Environmental Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Tel.:
   +972 4 829 3468; fax: +972 4 822 8898. E-mail address:
   dbroday@tx.technion.ac.il (D.M. Broday).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2015.03.014 0034-4257/© 2015 Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

at given wavelengths due to scattering and absorption along the measured
atmospheric column. The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
(MODIS) land AOD products are calculated by two operational algorithms:
the Dark Target (DT) algorithm and the Deep Blue (DB) algorithm. The DT
algorithm uses as an input MODIS level 1 data (L1B), including the
integrated spectral reﬂectance of 7 bands in the 470--2110 nm range as
well as the geo-location, and processes them by a set of rules to
retrieve the AOD (Levy, Remer, Tanré́, Mattoo, & Kaufman, 2009). However,
it is well recognized that due to algorithmic limitations retrievals of
AOD above dark surfaces (ocean, rainforest, etc.) are considerably more
reliable than retrievals over bright and highly reﬂective surfaces, such
as deserts, urban areas, snow, and coastal regions (Martin, 2008). To
overcome this limitation, the DB algorithm processes spectral data
mainly from the blue (412--470 nm) spectral channels (Hsu et al., 2006,
2013; Hsu, Tsay, King, & Herman, 2006), since bright surfaces show high
reﬂectivity in the red bands of the visible and the near infrared
spectrum and low reﬂectivity in the blue spectral region. The DB
algorithm has been found to outperform the DT algorithm over bright
surfaces and to retrieve more accurate AOD values (Hsu et al., 2006,
2013; Sayer, Hsu, Bettenhausen, & Jeong, 2013).

M. Sorek-Hamer et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 163 (2015)
180--185

Many studies have examined relationships between the total atmospheric
column AOD DT and surface PM 2.5 measurements (e.g. Chudnovsky, Lee,
Kostinski, Kotlov, & Koutrakis, 2012; Hoff & Christopher, 2009), usually
using linear regressions to link the AOD DT and PM 2.5 mass
concentrations (Engel-Cox et al., 2004; Wang & Christopher, 2003). To
improve the AOD--PM2.5 relationship, recent studies used multivariate
regression models, accounting for local meteorological parameters, such
as the boundary layer height and relative humidity (Liu, Paciorek, &
Koutrakis, 2009), land use information (Kloog, Nordio, Coull, &
Schwartz, 2012), and other co-measured satellite-borne products (Gupta
et al., 2006; Koelemeijer et al., 2006; Liu, Franklin, Kahn, &
Koutrakis, 2005, 2007; Liu, Sarnat, Kilaru, Jacob, & Koutrakis, 2005;
Sorek-Hamer et al., 2013a; Strawa, Chatﬁeld, Legg, Scarnato, & Esswein,
2013). Since many time-varying parameters, such as local meteorological
variables (temperature, RH), the vertical PM2.5 concentration proﬁle,
and the particle optical and other thermo-physical properties affect the
AOD--PM2.5 relationship, it is reasonable to expect that it will vary on
a daily basis (Lee, Liu, Coull, Schwartz, & Koutrakis, 2011). To account
for this variability and improve PM2.5 prediction, Lee et al. (2011)
suggested to use a mixed effects regression model, which enables
calibration of the model for time varying variables (“daily
calibration”). This approach has been extended by analyzing the residual
errors (Kloog, Koutrakis, Coull, Lee, & Schwartz, 2011) and by
accounting for missing satellite retrievals (Kloog et al., 2012) and for
regression coefﬁcients that are spatially and temporally correlated
(Chang, Hu, & Liu, 2013; Hu et al., 2013). In this work we apply the
daily calibration method for predicting ground PM2.5 , using MODIS AOD
data over Israel and San Joaquin

181

Valley (SJV), Central California, as the main predictor variable. Since
both regions are characterized by bright surfaces, we explored the
beneﬁts of using AODDB retrievals as well as the combined AODDB-DT
product from the recently released collection 6 (C06). To our best
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that utilizes AODDB and the combined
AODDB-DT product within a mixed effects model for PM2.5 prediction. 2.
Methods 2.1. Study area Israel is located in the East Mediterranean,
near the Sinai and Saudi Arabia deserts, and is characterized by a
semi-arid climate. The local PM2.5 monitoring network is distributed
heterogeneously over the country, mostly around the major populated
areas (Fig. 1a). Using univariate linear regressions to explore the
relationships between daily PM2.5 concentrations and collocated
satellite-borne AOD observations, poor coefﬁcient of determination were
obtained (R2 = 0.2). SJV is located southeast of San Francisco, between
the Coastal Mountain range to the west and the Sierra Nevada range to
the east (Fig. 1b). It is an important agricultural area that is
characterized by a Mediterranean climate similar to Israel, and by
fairly poor air quality. For example, PM2.5 levels in SJV exceeded the
EPA standard (35 μg/m3) in 14% of the days during the study period (e.g.
in over 350 days during 2005--2008). Previous studies in SJV, which used
univariate linear regressions and accounted only for satellite AOD,
reported poor correlations with both daily and hourly PM2.5 measurements
(Engel-Cox et al., 2004; Zhang, Hoff, & Engel-Cox, 2009).

Fig. 1. Study areas: (a) Israel, and (b) San Joaquin Valley, CA.

182

M. Sorek-Hamer et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 163 (2015)
180--185

2.2. Data 2.2.1. Ground level monitoring In Israel, daily average PM 2.5
concentrations for 12 years (2002--2013) were obtained by averaging
quality assured halfhourly PM 2.5 concentrations obtained from the
Technion Center of Excellence in Exposure Science and Environmental
Health (TCEEH) air pollution monitoring database (TAPMD). Air quality
monitoring in Israel is conducted by different agencies: governmental,
municipal, and the Israel Electric Company and the Israel Airport
Authority, and regulated by the Ministry for Environmental Protection
(MoEP). The measurement is performed using TEOM continuous monitoring
instruments, operated and maintained according to the US-EPA guidelines.
The typical measurement error is ± 1 μg/m3 (Yuval & Broday, 2006). In
SJV, PM2.5 measurements from 2005 to 2008 were obtained from stations
operated by the California Air Resources Board (CARB). We used six air
quality monitoring (AQM) stations that are distributed across the SJV
study area. Daily PM2.5 concentrations measured by the ﬁlter-based
Federal Reference Method (FRM) were obtained using the online “Real-Time
Query Tool” (RTQT; http://www.arb.ca.gov/aqmis2/ aqdselect.php). As with
any measurement method, the gravimetric based FRM has some inherent
limitations that may cause sampling errors (Code of Federal Regulations
--- Protection of Environment, 2012).

2.2.2. Satellite observations Satellite data used in this study were
collected by the MODIS platform aboard NASA's EOS-Aqua satellite. Aqua
was launched into a sun-synchronous orbit on May 4, 2002, and observes
both study areas between 13:00 and 14:00 local sun time (Levy et al.,
2009). MODIS products were used due to their high availability, the
MODIS effective cloud mask algorithm and its almost daily global
coverage. MODIS pixels collocated with ground PM2.5 stations were used
with a nadir spatial resolution of 10 × 10 km. The MODIS data products
used were the collection 6 (C06) Level II aerosol products: Dark Target
AOD over land at 550 nm (hereafter AODDT), Deep Blue AOD over land at
550 nm (hereafter AODDB), and the combined DB and DT AOD product over
land at 550 nm (hereafter AODDB-DT). All the satellite data were
characterized by the highest recommended quality assurance ﬂags (QA N 1
for DB products and QA = 3 for DT products, Sayer et al. (2013) and Levy
et al. (2013), respectively). The development of the merged C06 AODDB-DT
aerosol product was motivated by the desire to obtain data with better
spatial coverage than could be obtained using any of the individual
algorithms (i.e. DT, DB) alone (Sayer et al., 2014). Namely, whereas
there are areas in which AOD may be retrieved by both the DB and the DT
algorithms (e.g. Fig. 2), the DT algorithm essentially excludes most of
the bright desert surfaces (Levy, Remer, & Dubovik, 2007; Levy et al.,
2013). Whereas this was not relevant for model calibration, since the PM

Fig. 2. Spatial pattern of (a) Deep Blue (DB) and (b) Dark Target (DT)
retrieved annual mean AOD over Israel in 2013.

M. Sorek-Hamer et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 163 (2015)
180--185

183

monitoring stations are situated in areas covered by both algorithms
(Fig. 2), it is important when applying the calibrated model for PM2.5
prediction in all the grid cells with AOD data. The monthly NDVI product
(MYD13C2; Huete, Didan, van Leeuwen, Miura, & Glenn, 2011) is used
within the C06 algorithm for deciding which algorithm will be used to
retrieve the AOD in each grid cell, thus producing the combined AODDB-DT
product. Speciﬁcally, when NDVI N 0.3 the DT product is used, when NDVI
b 0.2 the DB product is used, and when 0.2 b NDVI b 0.3 the routine
considers the quality ﬂags such that the AOD product with the higher QA
ﬂag is reported. If both products have the same QA ﬂag with high
conﬁdence, the reported AODDB-DT is the average of the two AOD products
(AODDT and AODDB). If neither has high conﬁdence QA ﬂag the AODDB-DT
remains undeﬁned (Levy et al., 2013).

Table 1 Statistics, coefﬁcient of determination for linear regression
and availability of PM2.5 and collocated satellite data in Israel during
the study period (2002--2013).

2.3. Statistical methodology

linear ﬁts (i.e. low coefﬁcients of determination) between daily PM2.5
concentrations and the different AOD products were obtained in both
regions (Tables 1 and 2). Table 3 depicts the mean coefﬁcient of
determination (measured vs. predicted PM2.5 concentrations) as well as
the RMSPE and NRMSPE of the different mixed effects models applied in
Israel and SJV. As seen, the models performed better in SJV than in
Israel. This could result from numerous differences between the two
regions, including the PBL structure, PM vertical distribution and
composition and surface reﬂectivity, and may also be partly explained by
the distinct PM monitoring methods used in the two regions (see the
Methods section). As both study areas are characterized by high albedo
and since the AODDB product has been developed to enable improved PM2.5
retrievals over bright surfaces, we examined the use of AODDB instead of
AODDT as the main model variable. The high availability of AODDB
(especially in Israel, Tables 1) clearly supported this approach.
Indeed, using AODDB revealed consistent improved model performance over
the baseline models in both SJV and Israel (R2 of 0.69 and 0.45 in SJV
and Israel, respectively, and smaller prediction errors; Table 3). These
results indicate the important differences between the DT and DB AOD
retrieval algorithms for PM2.5 estimation in regions that are
characterized by higher albedo. Speciﬁcally, the improved performance of
the AODDB-based PM2.5 prediction model in Israel resulted from (a) an
additional PM2.5 station whose data could not be used when AODDT was the
key model variable due to its limited spatial availability, and (b) 225
more days for which AODDB was available beyond the number of days for
which AODDT was available (Table 1). It is noteworthy that only in 1804
days both AODDB and AODDT were available in colocation with at least one
PM2.5 monitoring station. AOD availability limitations suggested that it
may be advantageous to use a combined AOD product, thus increasing the
number of days in which AOD is available. For example, Fig. 2 shows the
year 2013 annual mean AOD at each 10 × 10 km grid cell over Israel. The
map clearly illustrates that AODDT is available over the more vegetated
northern part of Israel whereas AODDB is available also over the arid
and desert southern part of Israel, which is characterized by much
higher surface reﬂectance. Nonetheless, in both study areas using the
combined C06 AODDB-DT product did not increase signiﬁcantly the number
of observations that could be used for building the models

We applied the daily-calibration model approach, allowing the AOD--PM2.5
relationship to vary on a daily basis yet assuming that on any given day
the relationship does not vary spatially within each of the study
domains (Israel and SJV). This was achieved by pooling estimates for the
daily slope using a mixed effects model (Eq. (1)). The ﬁxed effects
represent the average relationship between AOD and PM2.5 during the
study period across all the monitoring stations in each region. The
random effects represent the daily variability of the regional
AOD--PM2.5 relationship. PM 2:5 i; j ¼ α 0 þ α 1 AODi; j þ β1; j AODi; j
þ β2; j þ β3;i þ εi; j ;

ð1Þ

where PM2:5i; j is the daily average PM2.5 concentration at the i-th
monitoring station on the j-th day (with j being the day of the year)
and AODi,j is the AOD value on that day in the grid cell that contains
this station, i.e. is collocated with the ground PM measurements
(Sorek-Hamer et al., 2013a). The parameters α0 (intercept) and α1
(slope) correspond to the ﬁxed effect whereas β1,j (slope) and β2,j
(intercept) correspond to the random effects of the AOD and to the date,
respectively. A site-speciﬁc bias may arise since the AOD values
correspond to an average over a 10 × 10 km grid whereas the PM2.5
concentrations are locally measured and may not represent the entire
grid cell (e.g. due to occasional wind or intermittent local sources).
To control for such a potential bias, a random effect site intercept at
station i, β3,i, has been included in the model (Lee et al., 2011). To
evaluate the model we used a ten-fold out-of-sample cross validation
scheme. Namely, the dataset was randomly divided into a training dataset
(90%), used to parameterize the model, and a test dataset (10%), used to
evaluate the calibrated model. This process was repeated 100 times for
each model, thus enabling to estimate the uncertainty of the model
parameters. All these steps were performed using R V3.1.1 ‘lme4' package
(Bates & Maechler, 2010). The baseline regional models used AODDT as the
model variables (Eq. (1)). The advantages of using DB retrievals over
the study areas were explored using AODDB or AODDB-DT as model
variables. To assess the performance of the different models we compared
the average PM2.5 model predictions (in the test runs) to observations,
examining several error measures: the coefﬁcient of determination (R2),
the root mean squared predicted error (RMSPE), and the normalized RMSPE
(NRMSPE). 3. Results In Israel, 2033 days (4091 observations) during the
study period had both PM2.5 and collocated AOD records available in the
study period, with considerable higher availability (both number of days
and number of observations) of AODDB than AODDT (Table 1). In SJV, on
the other hand, there was no signiﬁcant difference between the number of
collocated observations (N) and days (D) in which either AODDB or AODDT
observations were available (Table 2). Moreover, rather poor

Variable

Min

5%

95%

Max

Mean

R2 with PM2.5 (N/Da)

AODDT AODDB AODDB-DT PM2.5 PM10

−0.03 0.03 −0.03 0.00 0.00

0.10 0.05 0.08 9.85 21.25

0.69 0.46 0.64 45.05 122.72

4.00 2.09 4.00 315.90 1031.46

0.31 0.19 0.29 23.17 53.45

0.21 (3981/1806) 0.13 (4882/2031) 0.19 (4901/2033) -- --

a N = number of satellite observations collocated with available PM2.5
monitoring data. D = number of days in which satellite observations
collocated with PM2.5 monitoring data were available.

Table 2 Statistics, coefﬁcient of determination for linear regression
and availability of PM2.5 and of collocated satellite data in SJV during
the study period (2005--2008). Variable

Min

5%

95%

Max

Mean

R2 with PM2.5 (N/Da)

AODDT AODDB AODDB-DT PM2.5

−0.05 0.01 −0.05 1.33

0 0.03 0 5.27

0.48 0.3 0.48 57.4

0.95 0.62 0.95 103.00

0.15 0.15 0.16 21.28

0.03 (2117/448) 0.13 (2112/448) 0.03 (2117/448) --

a N = number of satellite observations collocated with available PM2.5
monitoring data. D = number of days in which satellite observations
collocated with PM2.5 monitoring data were available.

184

M. Sorek-Hamer et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 163 (2015)
180--185

Table 3 Performance of the mixed effects models for PM2.5 prediction
(average ± SD of 1000 evaluation runs for each model, each based on
randomly selected 10% of the data). Model

PM2.5 ~ (AODDT, date, site) PM2.5 ~ (AODDB, date, site) PM2.5 ~
(AODDB-DT, date, site)

Israel

SJV

R2

RMSPE (μg/m3)

NRMSPE (−)

R2

RMSPE (μg/m3)

NRMSPE (−)

0.40 ± 0.04 0.45 ± 0.05 0.42 ± 0.04

12.43 ± 0.77 12.06 ± 0.73 12.26 ± 0.67

0.53 ± 0.03 0.52 ± 0.03 0.53 ± 0.03

0.62 ± 0.07 0.69 ± 0.07 0.63 ± 0.07

10.07 ± 1.4 9.09 ± 1.2 9.7 ± 1.2

0.48 ± 0.05 0.44 ± 0.05 0.47 ± 0.05

beyond that available when using the AOD DB (Tables 1 and 2). Moreover,
in both study areas using the combined AODDB-DT product as a predictor
variable did not outperform the models that used the AODDB product as a
predictor variable. Namely, the AODDB captured more variability and
enabled better PM2.5 prediction. 4. Discussion In general, our results
support previous ﬁndings showing that accounting for daily AOD--PM2.5
variation of the regression coefﬁcients improves PM2.5 estimation
(Chudnovsky et al., 2012; Hu et al., 2014; Kloog et al., 2012, 2013).
Yet, this is the ﬁrst study that used both the AODDB and the combined
C06 AODDB-DT products as variables within the mixed effects model for
predicting PM2.5. Using either of these variables increased the number
of available observations considerably and improved the performance of
the models. Using the AODDB product as a model variable resulted in the
highest R2 and the lowest errors in both study areas (Table 3), in
agreement with Sayer et al. (2014). Yet, surprisingly and in contrast to
simplistic conclusions that could be drawn from Fig. 2, the C06 AODDB-DT
product in both Israel and SJV is dominated by AODDT. Namely, in Israel
the C06 AODDB-DT product consisted of 20% AODDB observations, 74% AODDT
observations, and the remaining 6% were the averages of AODDT and AODDB
observations of equal quality. The corresponding values for SJV were
12%, 85%, and 3%, respectively. The latter probably explains the similar
performance of the models that used the AODDT and the AODDB-DT products
(Table 3). To further examine this result, we manually built a combined
AODDB-DT product. Two alternatives for producing this variable were
tested: (a) using all the available AODDB records and ﬁlling in missing
time points with AODDT if data are available, or (b) using all the
available AODDT records and ﬁlling in missing time points with AODDB if
data are available. Whereas these schemes provided distinct datasets,
predicted PM2.5 concentrations were similar with no signiﬁcant advantage
to either scheme. The results of the models that used this manually
combined product were identical to those reported in Table 3 (e.g. for
Israel the R2 was 0.42 ± 0.04, the RMSPE was 12.25 ± 0.78 μg/m3, and the
NRMSPE was 0.53 ± 0.03). The semi-arid climate that Israel experience is
characterized by excess dust that results from dust storms as well as
from resuspension of settled dust. Furthermore, currently there are more
PM10 monitoring stations than PM2.5 monitoring stations in Israel.
Hence, it was possible to study also the AOD--PM10 relationships in
Israel, using a relatively large set of collocated measurements. Using
Eq. (1), we examined the possibility to predict daily PM10
concentrations using the different AOD products as model variables. In
general, the models for PM10 prediction performed much better than those
for PM2.5 prediction (e.g., R2 of 0.40 and 0.68 for prediction of PM2.5
and PM10, respectively, using AODDT as the predictor variable; Table 4).
Using AODDB or the combined AODDB-DT product for predicting PM10
improved slightly the R2 relative to the baseline model. Consistent with
the results obtained when predicting PM2.5, PM10 prediction using the
AODDB product is somewhat better than when using the combined AODDB-DT
product (Table 4). Interestingly, the C06 AODDB-DT product used for PM10
prediction consisted of a larger fraction (35%) of AODDB observations
and a smaller fraction (50%) of AODDT observations than the AODDB-DT
product used for predicting the PM2.5 concentrations.

The results reported in this study are better than those reported
previously using the MARS (Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines)
model (Sorek-Hamer et al., 2013a). To further compare the performance of
the two modeling approaches, we re-ran the MARS model using different
combinations of AOD products and day-of-the year (DOY) or its smoothed
spline representation (SDOY), which were previously found by us to
better MARS performance in SJV (Sorek-Hamer et al., 2013a). The MARS
runs revealed inferior average performance relative to the mixed effects
models (Table 5). Moreover, the better performance of the MARS models in
SJV than in Israel is consistent with the results of the mixed effects
models (Table 3) and may possibly result from the larger variation of
the AOD--PM2.5 relationships in Israel (Tables 1 and 2). Furthermore,
although the combined AODDB-DT product increased the data availability
and improved the results of the mixed effects model in comparison to
using AODDT (Table 3), it did not have a similar consistent effect when
used as a variable of the MARS model. Judging by the scrutiny reported
in this work, using AODDB as the predictor variable in mixed effects
models to predict PM2.5 (and PM10) in areas characterized by highly
reﬂecting surfaces, like Israel and SJV, is superior to any other model
or AOD product. Nonetheless, to enable the use of such a model for
assessing exposure to PM2.5 or PM10, as part of an environmental health
study, requires to (a) expand model prediction to areas where AOD is
missing (e.g. due to clouds and poor SNR), thus obtaining complete
spatial coverage of PM prediction; (b) improve the spatial resolution of
the AOD product and increase the predicted spatial variation of PM
concentrations, thus accounting for exposure variability among
individuals; and (c) improve the estimation and increase the explained
variability (R2), thus reducing exposure uncertainty and
misclassiﬁcation. 5. Conclusions This study examines the use of mixed
effect models for studying relationships between satellite-borne aerosol
products and ground PM2.5 observations in areas that are characterized
by bright surfaces. It used the recently released MODIS collection 6
(Sayer et al., 2013, 2014), which is characterized by improved AOD
retrieval (hence availability) over such areas. In particular, to the
best of our knowledge this is the ﬁrst study to use the AODDB and the
combined AODDB-DT products as predictors within such a model. Use of
AODDB as a mixed effects model variable was found to signiﬁcantly
improve the ability to predict daily average PM2.5 concentrations in
both Israel and SJV, with much better model results than obtained using
linear regressions or MARS. In contrast to previous work that showed
improved model performance when using the AODDB and AODDT products
together

Table 4 Performance of the mixed effects models for PM10 prediction in
Israel (average ± SD of 1000 evaluation runs for each model, each based
on randomly selected 10% of the data). Model

N

R2

RMSPE (μg/m3)

NRMSPE (−)

PM10 ~ (AODDT, date, site) PM10 ~ (AODDB, date, site) PM10 ~ (AODDB-DT,
date, site)

6336 9429 9439

0.68 ± 0.02 0.69 ± 0.02 0.69 ± 0.02

31.97 ± 1.83 27.92 ± 1.37 28.2 ± 1.27

0.57 ± 0.03 0.52 ± 0.02 0.53 ± 0.02

M. Sorek-Hamer et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 163 (2015)
180--185 Table 5 Performance of the MARS models (average of ten
evaluation runs for each model based on randomly selected 10% of the
data). Model

PM2.5 ~ (AODDT, DOY) PM2.5 ~ (AODDT, sDOY) PM2.5 ~ (AODDB, DOY) PM2.5 ~
(AODDB, sDOY) PM2.5 ~ (AODDB-DT, DOY) PM2.5 ~ (AODDB-DT, sDOY)

Israel

SJV

RMSPE (μg/m3)

R2 (max)

RMSPE (μg/m3)

R2 (max)

13.74 13.37 15.13 15.63 14.04 13.89

0.27 (0.4) 0.28 (0.41) 0.24 (0.36) 0.16 (0.34) 0.25 (0.42) 0.25 (0.39)

11.09 11.01 10.60 10.20 11.04 10.83

0.55 (0.73) 0.56 (0.73) 0.60 (0.77) 0.62 (0.76) 0.55 (0.74) 0.58 (0.78)

(Sorek-Hamer et al., 2013a; Sorek-Hamer, Cohen, Levy, Ziv, & Broday,
2013b; Strawa et al., 2013), using the combined C06 AODDB-DT product
resulted in inferior performance than when accounting only for the AODDB
product. This result was consistent across both study areas and for
predicting both PM2.5 and PM10 concentrations. Hence, the use of
satellite aerosol products to improve our capability to estimate ﬁne and
coarse PM concentrations over large areas in arid regions while
observing the PM spatiotemporal variability has a great potential for
air quality management, environmental surveillance, and estimation of
exposure metrics that can be used in environmental health studies.
Acknowledgments M.S.H. would like to thank the Environment and Health
Fund, Israel, for supporting her studies with a doctoral fellowship, and
NASA AMES Research Center, CA, USA for hosting her in summer 2012. The
research was done at the Technion Center of Excellence in Exposure
Science and Environmental Health (TCEEH). The authors thank the
reviewers for their valuable comments. References Bates, D., & Maechler,
M. (2010). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R package
version 0.999375-35 (http://CRAN.Rproject.org/package = lme4). Chang,
H.H., Hu, X., & Liu, Y. (2013). Calibrating MODIS aerosol optical depth
for predicting daily PM2.5 concentrations via statistical downscaling.
Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology, 24, 398--404.
Chudnovsky, A.A., Lee, H.J., Kostinski, A., Kotlov, T., & Koutrakis, P.
(2012). Prediction of daily ﬁne particulate matter concentrations using
aerosol optical depth retrievals from the Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellite (GOES). Journal of the Air & Waste Management
Association, 62(9), 1022--1031. Code of Federal Regulations ---
Protection of Environment (2012). 40 CFR part 50, appendix L ---
Reference method for the determination of ﬁne particulate matter as
PM2.5 in the atmosphere. Dominici, F., Peng, R.D., & Bell, M.L. (2006).
Fine particulate air pollution and hospital admission for cardiovascular
and respiratory diseases. JAMA, 295(10), 1127--1134. Engel-Cox, J.A.,
Holloman, C.H., Coutant, B.W., & Hoff, R.M. (2004). Qualitative and
quantitative evaluation of MODIS satellite sensor data for regional and
urban scale air quality. Atmospheric Environment, 38, 2495--2509.
Franklin, M., Zeka, A., & Schwartz, J. (2007). Association between PM2.5
and all-cause and speciﬁc cause mortality in 27 US communities. Journal
of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology, 17, 279--287. Gupta,
P., & Christopher, S. (2008). Seven year particulate matter air quality
assessment from surface and satellite measurements. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics Discussions, 8, 327--365. Gupta, P., Christopher,
S.A., Wang, J., Gehrig, R., Lee, Y., & Kumar, N. (2006). Satellite
remote sensing of particulate matter and air quality assessment over
global cities. Atmospheric Environment, 40, 5880--5892. Hoff, R.M., &
Christopher, S.A. (2009). Remote sensing of particulate pollution from
space: Have we reached the promised land? Journal of the Air & Waste
Management Association, 59, 645--675. Hsu, N.C., Jeong, M. -J.,
Bettenhausen, C., Sayer, A.M., Hansell, R., Seftor, C.S., et al. (2013).
Enhanced Deep Blue aerosol retrieval algorithm: The second generation.
Journal of Geophysical Research, [Atmospheres], 118, 9296--9315. Hsu,
N.C., Tsay, S., King, M.D., & Herman, J.R. (2006). Deep Blue retrievals
of Asian aerosol properties during ACE-Asia. IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 44, 3180--3195. Hu, X., Waller, L.A.,
Al-Hamdan, M.Z., Crosson, W.L., Estes, M.G., Jr., Estes, S.M., et al.
(2013). Estimating ground-level PM2.5 concentrations in the southeastern
U.S. using geographically weighted regression. Environmental Research,
121, 1--10.

185

Hu, X., Waller, L.A., Lyapustin, A., Wang, Y., Al-Hamdan, M.Z., Crosson,
W.L., et al. (2014). Estimating ground-level PM2.5 concentrations in the
Southeastern United States using MAIAC AOD retrievals and a two-stage
model. Remote Sensing of Environment, 140, 220--232. Huete, A., Didan,
K., van Leeuwen, W., Miura, T., & Glenn, E. (2011). MODIS vegetation
indices. Land Remote Sensing and Global Environmental Change, 1, 579
(7\_26). Kloog, I., Koutrakis, P., Coull, B.A., Lee, H.J., & Schwartz,
J. (2011). Assessing temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures
for epidemiological studies using satellite aerosol optical depth
measurements. Atmospheric Environment, 45(35), 6267--6275. Kloog, I.,
Nordio, F., Coull, B.A., & Schwartz, J. (2012). Incorporating local land
use regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model of
spatiotemporal PM2.5 exposures in the mid-Atlantic states. Environmental
Science and Technology, 46(21), 11913--11921. Kloog, I., Ridgway, B.,
Koutrakis, P., Coull, B.A., & Schwartz, J.D. (2013). Long- and
short-term exposure to PM2.5 and mortality. Epidemiology, 24, 555--561.
Koelemeijer, R.B.A., Homan, C.D., & Matthijsen, J. (2006). Comparison of
spatial and temporal variations of aerosol optical thickness and
particulate matter over Europe. Atmospheric Environment, 40(27),
5304--5315. Lee, H.J., Liu, Y., Coull, B.A., Schwartz, J., & Koutrakis,
P. (2011). A novel calibration approach of MODIS AOD data to predict
PM2.5 concentrations. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 11, 7991--8002.
Levy, R.C., Mattoo, S., Munchak, L.A., Remer, L.A., Sayer, A.M., & Hsu,
N.C. (2013). The Collection 6 MODIS aerosol products over land and
ocean. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques, 6, 2989--3034. Levy, R.C.,
Remer, L.A., & Dubovik, O. (2007). Global aerosol optical properties and
application to moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer aerosol
retrieval over land. Journal of Geophysical Research --- Atmospheres,
112, D13210. Levy, R.C., Remer, L.A., Tanré́ , D., Mattoo, S., & Kaufman,
Y.J. (2009). Algorithm for remote sensing of tropospheric aerosol over
dark targets from MODIS: Collections 005 and 051, revision 2.
http://modis-atmos.gsfc.nasa.gov/\_docs/ ATBD\_MOD04\_C005\_rev2.pdf
Liu, Y., Franklin, M., Kahn, R., & Koutrakis, P. (2007). Using aerosol
optical thickness to predict ground-level PM2.5 concentrations in the
St. Louis area: A comparison between MISR and MODIS. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 107, 33--44. Liu, Y., Paciorek, C.J., & Koutrakis, P.
(2009). Estimating regional spatial and temporal variability of PM2.5
concentrations using satellite data, meteorology, and land use
information. Environmental Health Perspectives, 117(6), 886--892. Liu,
Y., Sarnat, J.A., Kilaru, V., Jacob, D.J., & Koutrakis, P. (2005).
Estimating ground-level PM2.5 in the eastern United States using
satellite remote sensing. Environmental Science and Technology, 39,
3269--3278. Martin, R.V. (2008). Satellite remote sensing of surface air
quality. Atmospheric Environment, 42, 7823--7843. Sayer, A.M., Hsu,
N.C., Bettenhausen, C., & Jeong, M. -J. (2013). Validation and
uncertainty estimates for MODIS Collection 6 Deep Blue aerosol data.
Journal of Geophysical Research --- Atmospheres, 118, 7864--7872. Sayer,
A.M., Munchak, L.A., Hsu, N.C., Levy, R.C., Bettenhausen, C., & Jeong,
M.J. (2014). MODIS Collection 6 aerosol products: Comparison between
Aqua's Deep Blue, Dark Target, and merged datasets, and usage
recommendations. Journal of Geophysical Research --- Atmospheres, 119.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2014JD022453. Schwartz, J., Dockery, D.W., &
Neas, L.M. (1996). Is daily mortality associated speciﬁcally with ﬁne
particles? Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 46(10),
927--939. Sorek-Hamer, M., Cohen, A., Levy, R.C., Ziv, B., & Broday,
D.M. (2013a). Classiﬁcation of dust days by satellite remotely sensed
aerosol products. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 34(8),
2672--2688. Sorek-Hamer, M., Strawa, A.W., Chatﬁeld, R.B., Esswein, R.,
Cohen, A., & Broday, D.M. (2013b). Improved retrieval of PM2.5 from
satellite data products using non-linear methods. Environmental
Pollution, 182, 417--423. Strawa, A.W., Chatﬁeld, R.B., Legg, M.,
Scarnato, B., & Esswein, R. (2013). Improving retrievals of regional ﬁne
particulate matter concentrations from moderate resolution imaging
spectroradiometer (MODIS) and ozone monitoring instrument (OMI)
multisatellite observations. Journal of the Air & Waste Management
Association, 63(12), 1434--1446. van Donkelaar, A., Martin, R.V.,
Brauer, M., Kahn, R., Levy, R.C., Verduzco, C., et al. (2010). Global
estimates of ambient ﬁne particulate matter concentrations from
satellitebased aerosol optical depth: Development and application.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 118, 847--855. Wang, J., &
Christopher, S.A. (2003). Intercomparison between satellite-derived
aerosol optical thickness and PM2.5 mass: Implications for air quality
studies. Geophysical Research Letters, 2095, 30(21).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2003GL018174. Yuval, & Broday, D.M. (2006).
High-resolution spatial patterns of long-term mean concentrations of air
pollutants in Haifa Bay area. Atmospheric Environment, 40, 3653--3664.
Zanobetti, A., Franklin, M., Koutrakis, P., & Schwartz, J. (2009). Fine
particulate air pollution and its components in association with
cause-speciﬁc emergency admissions. Environmental Health, 8(1, article
58). Zhang, H., Hoff, R.M., & Engel-Cox, J.A. (2009). The relation
between moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer (MODIS) aerosol
optical depth and PM2.5 over the United States: A geographical
comparison by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regions. Journal of
the Air & Waste Management Association, 59, 1358--1369.


