Clinical Sciences Long-Term Exposure to Fine Particulate Matter,
Residential Proximity to Major Roads and Measures of Brain Structure
Elissa H. Wilker, ScD; Sarah R. Preis, ScD; Alexa S. Beiser, PhD; Philip
A. Wolf, MD; Rhoda Au, PhD; Itai Kloog, PhD; Wenyuan Li, MS; Joel
Schwartz, PhD; Petros Koutrakis, PhD; Charles DeCarli, MD; Sudha
Seshadri, MD; Murray A. Mittleman, MD, DrPH Background and
Purpose---Long-term exposure to ambient air pollution is associated with
cerebrovascular disease and cognitive impairment, but whether it is
related to structural changes in the brain is not clear. We examined the
associations between residential long-term exposure to ambient air
pollution and markers of brain aging using magnetic resonance imaging.
Methods---Framingham Offspring Study participants who attended the
seventh examination were at least 60 years old and free of dementia and
stroke were included. We evaluated associations between exposures (fine
particulate matter [PM2.5] and residential proximity to major roadways)
and measures of total cerebral brain volume, hippocampal volume, white
matter hyperintensity volume (log-transformed and extensive white matter
hyperintensity volume for age), and covert brain infarcts. Models were
adjusted for age, clinical covariates, indicators of socioeconomic
position, and temporal trends. Results---A 2-μg/m3 increase in PM2.5 was
associated with −0.32% (95% confidence interval, −0.59 to −0.05) smaller
total cerebral brain volume and 1.46 (95% confidence interval, 1.10 to
1.94) higher odds of covert brain infarcts. Living further away from a
major roadway was associated with 0.10 (95% confidence interval, 0.01 to
0.19) greater log-transformed white matter hyperintensity volume for an
interquartile range difference in distance, but no clear pattern of
association was observed for extensive white matter.
Conclusions---Exposure to elevated levels of PM2.5 was associated with
smaller total cerebral brain volume, a marker of age-associated brain
atrophy, and with higher odds of covert brain infarcts. These findings
suggest that air pollution is associated with insidious effects on
structural brain aging even in dementia- and stroke-free
persons.   (Stroke. 2015;46:00-00. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.008348.)
Key Words: air pollution ◼ brain infarcts ◼ neuroimaging

L

ong-term exposure to particulate air pollution has been associated with
higher incidence of stroke1 and impaired cognitive function in older
adults.2,3 Long-term exposures have also been associated with changes in
cerebral hemodynamics,4 impaired microvascular reactivity,5 and greater
carotid atherosclerotic burden.6 Air pollution has been hypothesized to
affect the central nervous system through activation of systemic
inflammatory pathways and vascular dysfunction.7 Particulate air
pollution is a pervasive component of urban and suburban ambient air
pollution. Animal models have shown that particles can translocate from
the nose via the olfactory nerve into the brain, and evidence of these
particles has been found in the striatum, frontal cortex, and
cerebellum.8 However, it

is not known whether long-term exposures to air pollution at urban
background levels are related to measures of structural integrity and
atrophy in the brains of older adults. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of the brain can detect early vascular impairment9 that is associated
with subsequent risk of dementia and stroke.10 Therefore, we
investigated the associations between exposure to fine particulate
matter (PM2.5) and residential proximity to major roadways with measures
of total cerebral brain volume (TCBV), hippocampal volume (HV), white
matter hyperintensity volume (WMHV), and covert brain infarcts (CBI) in
the Framingham Offspring Study. We hypothesized that higher long-term
exposure to ambient air pollution would be associated with

Received December 5, 2014; final revision received February 24, 2015;
accepted February 26, 2015. From the Cardiovascular Epidemiology
Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, MA (E.H.W., M.A.M.); Exposure, Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Department of Environmental Health (E.H.W., J.S., P.K.) and
Department of Epidemiology (W.L., J.S., M.A.M.), Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health, Boston, MA; Department of Biostatistics, School
of Public Health (S.R.P., A.S.B., R.A.) and Department of Neurology,
School of Medicine (A.S.B., P.A.W., S.S.), Boston University, MA;
Framingham Heart Study, MA (S.R.P., A.S.B., P.A.W., S.S.); Department of
Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel (I.K.); and Department of Neurology and Center
for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis (C.D.). Guest Editor
for this article was Markku Kaste, MD, PhD. Presented in part at the
International Society of Environmental Epidemiology meeting, Seattle,
WA, August 24--28, 2014. The online-only Data Supplement is available
with this article at
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.
114.008348/-/DC1. Correspondence to Elissa Wilker, ScD, Cardiovascular
Epidemiology Research Unit, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 375
Longwood Ave WMS/443, Boston, MA 02215. E-mail ewilker@bidmc.harvard.edu
© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc. Stroke is available at
http://stroke.ahajournals.org

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.008348

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on June 25, 2015 1

2  Stroke  May 2015 subclinical damage as indicated by smaller TCBV and
HV, larger WMHV, and higher odds of CBI.

Materials and Methods Study Participants The design of the Framingham
Offspring Study has been detailed previously.10,11 Community-dwelling
participants living in the New England Region with no history of
dementia, stroke, or transient ischemic attack who attended the seventh
examination (1998--2001) were aged ≥60 years at the time of MRI and were
eligible for inclusion in this study (n=943). All participants provided
written informed consent, and the Institutional Review Boards at Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Boston Medical Center approved the
protocol.

Exposure Assessment PM2.5 Satellite Data

Participant primary addresses at the seventh examination were geocoded
using ArcGIS 10 (ESRI, Redlands, CA), and census tract median household
income was assigned (US Census 2000). Beginning in the year 2000,
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer satellite-derived Aerosol
Optical Density measurements were used to predict daily PM2.5
concentration across New England as previously described.12,13

Near Roadway Exposure Residential proximity to the nearest A1, A2, or A3
roadway was determined by US Census Features Class in ArcGIS. We
categorized proximity based on the following cut points: <50, 50 to
<100, 100 to <200, 200 to <400, and 400 to <1000 m. We also evaluated
the continuous association between the natural logarithm of proximity to
a major roadway and neuroimaging outcomes because we have previously
reported that this exposure and mortality were linearly associated.12
Participants living further than 1000 m from a major road in rural areas
were excluded in primary analyses because the exposures of individuals
living in exurb areas beyond 1000 m away from a major roadway are likely
to be different from those of people living in urban and suburban areas.

Volumetric Brain MRI TCBV, HV, and WMHV assessments and inter-rater
reliability have been described previously.14--17 Total cranial volume
was determined by manual delineation of the intracranial vault, and
total brain parenchymal volume was determined by mathematical modeling.
TCBV was then computed as a ratio of brain parenchymal volume:total
cranial volume. The T2-weighted double spin-echo coronal sequences were
acquired in 4-mm contiguous slices. Extensive WMHV (EXT-WMHV) was
determined as a binary outcome by whether the log(WMHV/total cranial
volume) was >1 SD above the age-adjusted mean in this cohort.10,18 The
presence of CBI was determined manually on the basis of size (>3 mm),
location, and characteristics of the lesions.19

Table 1.  Population Characteristics (n=943) Characteristic

Median [IQR] or n (%)

Age at MRI, y

68 [9]

Systolic blood pressure, mm Hg

129 [25]

Diastolic blood pressure, mm Hg

72 [13]

Men

456 (48%)

Prevalent cardiovascular disease

130 (14%)

Smoking status  Current

73 (8%)

 Former

532 (56%)

 Never

337 (36%)

 Missing

1 (<1%)

Prevalent heart failure

46 (5%)

Diabetes mellitus

134 (14%)

Hypertension medication use

366 (39%)

Homocysteine

8.3 [3.1]

Education  Less than high school

51 (5%)

 High school

311 (33%)

 Some college/associate degree

275 (29%)

 Bachelors or higher

298 (32%)

 Missing education

8 (<1%)

Median household income

63,479 [29,270]

Total cerebral brain volume

78.41 [4.39]

Hippocampal volume

0.33 [0.07]

Log white matter hyperintensity volume

-2.69 [1.30]

Extensive white matter hyperintensity

135 (14%)

Covert brain infarcts

133 (14%)

IQR indicates interquartile range; and MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

Statistical Methods Linear and logistic regression models were used to
evaluate continuous outcomes (TCBV, HV, and WMHV) and dichotomous
outcomes (EXT-WMHV and CBI), respectively. We first adjusted for age at
MRI, [age at MRI]2, sex, time from examination 7 to MRI, median
household income, date of MRI, smoking status, pack-years smoked,
education, alcohol intake, and sine and cosine of MRI date to account
for seasonal trends (model 1). We then added covariates thought to be
potential confounders that could also be mediators of the associations

Table 2.  Exposure Characteristics Exposure

Median [IQR] or n (%)

Range

PM2.5, μg/m *

11.1 [1.7]

7.7---17.6

Distance to major road, m†

173 [367]

0--993

3

Additional Covariates

Distance by category, m

History of cardiovascular disease was determined as previously
described.20 Prevalent diabetes mellitus was defined as a fasting
glucose ≥126 mg/dL or oral hypoglycemic or insulin use at an examination
or any previous history of diabetes mellitus (excluding gestational
diabetes). Smoking status (never, current, and former), pack-years
smoked (<10 years, ≥10 years, and missing), education (no high school,
high school, some college, bachelors or higher), and alcohol intake (0,
1--7 drinks/wk, and 7--14, ≥15) were self-reported. Fasting homocysteine
was measured in plasma. Systolic and diastolic seated blood pressures
were calculated as the mean of 2 measurements taken during the clinical
examination.

 <50

226 (24%)

...

 50 to <100

87 (9%)

...

 100 to<200

149 (16%)

...

 200 to<400

186 (20%)

...

 400 to<1000

226 (24%)

...

69 (7%)

...

  ≥1000

IQR indicates interquartile range; and PM2.5, particulate matter.
*Estimates unavailable on 13 participants. †Sixty-nine participants
living ≥1000 m from a major road excluded.

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on June 25, 2015

Wilker et al   Long-Term Air Pollution and Brain Structure    3 Table
3.  Associations Between Exposures and Continuous Volumetric Outcomes
Model 1* Outcome Hippocampal volume

Exposure

β

95% CI

n

β

95% CI

n

<50

0.004

(−0.005 to 0.014)

865

0.005

(−0.004 to 0.015)

853

50 to <100

0.003

(−0.011 to 0.016)

...

0.003

(−0.010 to 0.017)

...

100 to <200

0.005

(−0.006 to 0.016)

...

0.005

(−0.006 to 0.016)

...

200 to <400

0.003

(−0.007 to 0.013)

...

0.003

(−0.007 to 0.013)

...

400 to <1000

Ref

...

...

Ref

...

...

Log(distance)‡

−0.002

(−0.007 to 0.003)

865

−0.003

(−0.008 to 0.002)

853

PM2.5§ Log (white matter hyperintensities)

Total cerebral brain volume

Model 2†

<50

0.0001 (−0.005 to 0.005) −0.17

(−0.35 to 0.01)

921 873

0.0004 (−0.005 to 0.005) −0.16

(−0.34 to 0.02)

909 861

50 to <100

−0.13

(−0.37 to 0.11)

...

−0.12

(−0.36 to 0.11)

...

100 to <200

−0.07

(−0.27 to 0.13)

...

−0.06

(−0.26 to 0.13)

... ...

200 to <400

0.02

(−0.16 to 0.21)

...

0.03

(−0.15 to 0.22)

400 to <1000

Ref

...

...

...

Ref

...

Log(distance)‡

0.10

(0.01 to 0.19)

873

0.09

(−0.0004 to 0.18)

861

PM2.5§

−0.06

(−0.16 to 0.03)

929

−0.08

(−0.17 to 0.01)

917 861

<50

0.23

(−0.29 to 0.75)

873

0.09

(−0.42 to 0.60)

50 to <100

0.45

(−0.24 to 1.14)

...

0.47

(−0.21 to 1.16)

...

100 to <200

−0.02

(−0.60 to 0.56)

...

−0.14

(−0.71 to 0.43)

...

200 to <400

−0.19

(−0.73 to 0.35)

...

−0.30

(−0.84 to 0.23)

...

400 to <1000

Ref

...

...

...

Ref

...

Log(distance)‡

−0.15

(−0.41 to 0.11)

873

−0.10

(−0.36 to 0.16)

861

PM2.5§

−0.32

(−0.59 to −0.05)

929

−0.26

(−0.53 to 0.004)

917

CI indicates confidence interval; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; and
PM2.5, particulate matter. *Model 1 adjusted for age, age2, sex, time
from examination 7 to MRI, median household income, date of MRI, smoking
status, packyears smoked, education (no high school, high school, some
college, bachelors or higher), drinking categories and sine and cosine
of MRI date to account for seasonal trends. †Model 2 adjusted for model
1 covariates+log (homocysteine), systolic blood pressure, diabetes
mellitus, cardiovascular disease, history of atrial fibrillation,
hypertension medications, and obesity. ‡Scaled to difference between
25th and 75th percentile of distance (367 m). §Scaled to 2 μg/m3
difference in PM2.5.

between particulate air pollution and brain structure, including natural
logarithm of homocysteine, systolic blood pressure, diabetes mellitus,
cardiovascular disease, history of atrial fibrillation, hypertension
medications, and obesity (body mass index ≥30 kg/m2) (model 2). We
tested whether observed associations differed by factors related to
biological susceptibility and socioeconomic position as an evaluation of
effect modification using cross-product terms for sex, diabetes
mellitus, obesity, current and former smoking (versus never smoking),
and median household income <25th percentile (≤$44 901). In sensitivity
analyses, we accounted for clustering by census tract to further control
confounding by socioeconomic position using generalized estimating
equations with exchangeable working correlation matrix. Nonlinearity was
evaluated using restricted cubic splines with knots at the 5th, 27.5th,
50th, 72.5th, and 95th percentiles. We evaluated associations with PM2.5
restricting to participants living within 1000 m of a major road. We
also considered whether adjusting for CBI altered findings for
associations between exposures of interest and TCBV.16 Models of PM2.5
were scaled to 2 μg/m3, which approximates the interquartile range (1.7
μg/m3). We present the results of log-linear residential proximity to
major roadway within 1000 m analyses for an interquartile range. All
analyses were performed in SAS version 9.3 or STATA version 12. Plots
were created using the POSTRCSPLINE package in Stata.21

Results Table 1 shows population characteristics. The median
(interquartile range) of PM2.5 exposure was 11.1 (1.7) μg/m3.

Participants lived a median distance (25th to 75th percentile) from a
major road of 173 (48--415) m (Table 2). The Spearman rank correlation
between the natural logarithm of residential distance from a major road
and PM2.5 was −0.15. Higher PM2.5 was associated with smaller TCBV and
1.46 times (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.10 to 1.94) higher odds of
CBI (Tables 3 and 4). A 2-μg/m3 increase in PM2.5 was associated with a
0.32 U difference in TCBV (95% CI, −0.59 to −0.05). There was no clear
pattern of association between PM2.5 and HV, WMHV, or EXT-WMHV. An
interquartile range difference in residential proximity to a major road
was associated with 0.10 (95% CI, 0.01 to 0.19) higher WMHV. A similar
pattern was observed with categories of distance. However, there was no
evidence of an association between proximity to a major road and
EXT-WMHV, or was it associated with TCBV, HV, or CBI. There was no
evidence of effect modification for the observed associations by sex,
diabetes mellitus diagnosis, obesity, smoking, or median income below
the 25th percentile. Only the association between PM2.5 and TCBV met
criteria for significant deviation from linearity, suggesting a stronger
association at lower exposure levels and wide CIs at high levels (Figure
I in the online-only Data Supplement). We found

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on June 25, 2015

4  Stroke  May 2015 Table 4.  Associations Between Exposures and Binary
Outcome Model 1* Outcome Extensive white matter hyperintensity volume
for age

Model 2†

Exposure

OR

95% CI

n

OR

95% CI

n

<50

0.88

(0.51--1.52)

873

0.94

(0.53--1.67)

861

50 to <100

0.56

(0.25--1.29)

...

0.59

(0.25--1.38)

...

100 to <200

0.86

(0.46--1.60)

...

0.96

(0.51--1.83)

...

200 to <400

1.05

(0.60--1.84)

...

1.16

(0.65--2.06)

...

400 to <1000

Ref

...

...

Ref

...

...

Log(distance)‡

1.11

(0.84--1.48)

873

1.09

(0.81--1.47)

861

PM2.5§

1.00

(0.76--1.32)

929

0.94

(0.70--1.26)

917

<50

1.21

(0.67--2.17)

870

1.29

(0.70--2.36)

861

50 to <100

1.25

(0.58--2.67)

...

1.16

(0.53--2.56)

...

100 to <200

1.17

(0.61--2.23)

...

1.10

(0.56--2.15)

... ...

Covert brain infarcts

200 to <400

1.69

(0.95--3.00)

...

1.72

(0.95--3.11)

400 to <1000

Ref

...

...

Ref

...

...

Log(distance)‡

1.05

(0.79--1.40)

870

1.02

(0.75--1.37)

861

PM2.5§

1.46

(1.10--1.94)

926

1.37

(1.02--1.85)

917

CI indicates confidence interval; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OR,
odds ratio; and PM2.5, particulate matter. *Model 1 adjusted for age,
age2, sex, time from examination 7 to MRI, median household income, date
of MRI, smoking status, pack-years smoked, education (no high school,
high school, some college, bachelors or higher), drinking categories and
sine and cosine of MRI date to account for seasonal trends. †Model 2
adjusted for model 1 covariates+log (homocysteine), systolic blood
pressure, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, history of atrial
fibrillation, hypertension medications, and obesity. ‡Scaled to
difference between 25th and 75th percentile of distance (367 m). §Scaled
to 2 μg/m3 difference in PM2.5.

no material differences when we considered restricting PM2.5 analyses to
regions within 1000 m of a major road or clustering by socioeconomic
position. Adjustment for covert brain injury did not alter the
association between PM2.5 and TCBV.

Discussion In this study, we observed that an increase in PM2.5 within
the range of exposures observed at urban and suburban background levels
in New England was associated with smaller −0.32 (95% CI, −0.59 to
−0.05) TCBV and with 1.46 times (95% CI, 1.10 to 1.94) higher odds of
CBI. These findings support the hypothesis that higher long-term
exposures to ambient air pollution are associated with structural
changes in the brain that could precede cognitive impairment and overt
cerebrovascular damage.22--24 To our knowledge, there are no published
studies of associations between air pollution and brain volume or CBI in
older adults. Although CBI may appear asymptomatic, these small infarcts
typically located in deep regions of the brain have been associated with
neurological abnormalities, poorer cognitive function,25 onset of
dementia,24 and are thought to reflect small-vessel disease.26 Smaller
TCBV has been associated subsequent stroke among Framingham Offspring
participants27 and also with poorer performance on tests of attention,
executive, and visuospatial function.16 The magnitude of association
that we observed for a 2-μg/m3 increase in PM2.5 was similar to ≈1 year
of brain aging computed as the ratio of the coefficients for PM2.5 and
age in the model. Adjustment for CBI did not alter this association,
suggesting that atrophy was

independent of the presence of asymptomatic injury and not merely a
direct result of the presence of cerebral infarction. The mechanisms
through which air pollution may affect brain aging remain unclear, but
systemic inflammation resulting from deposition of fine particles in
alveoli is likely important. Upregulation of a proinflammatory state has
been associated both with elevated risk of stroke7,28 and cognitive
decline.29 Circulating levels of biomarkers indicative of systemic
inflammation have been associated with lower brain volume.30 Our
findings are largely consistent with previous studies showing that
long-term exposure to ambient air pollution is associated with vascular
impairment.4,5,12 Several previous studies have reported associations
between long-term pollution exposure and living close to major roads
with incident stroke1,31,32 and poorer cognitive function in older
adults.2,3,33 Living in a high air pollution region in Mexico City was
associated with greater accumulation of 42-amino acid form of β-amyloid
in the frontal cortex and hippocampus than living in a nonpolluted
area.34 Although evidence on the associations between long-term air
pollution exposures and white matter damage is limited, an ecological
study in Mexico reported associations between higher levels of air
pollution and white matter damage in children and dogs.35 Our findings
of a positive association between WMHV and living further from a major
road but no association with EXT-WMHV were unexpected. However, among
Framingham Offspring Study participants, EXT-WMHV was associated with
poorer cognitive function18 and elevated risk of stroke10 but WMHV was
not, suggesting a threshold for these associations. Different findings
may have distinct underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms. To evaluate
this, it will

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on June 25, 2015

Wilker et al   Long-Term Air Pollution and Brain Structure    5 require
additional studies in experimental models designed to address these
questions. There were some differences in associations we observed for
PM2.5 and residential proximity to a major roadway. Although both
capture features of long-term exposure to ambient air pollution,
proximity is an integrated measure of exposure to traffic, which
includes vehicle emissions, noise, ultrafine particles, road dust, and
gaseous pollutants such as nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, and
volatile organic compounds but does not specifically account for the
intensity of traffic or meteorologic conditions at a given location. In
contrast, modeled PM2.5 incorporates both locally and regionally
generated air pollution. Hence, they represent different aspects of
ambient pollutant exposures. Our study is not without limitations.
Although we accounted for individual-level and area-level
characteristics of socioeconomic position, there may be residual
confounding. However, the results from our analysis taking spatial
clustering into account were similar to our primary results, and
previous literature using modeled PM2.5 has also shown that correlations
between socioeconomic position and PM2.5 are low within urban areas.36
The Framingham Offspring population comprised mostly white participants.
Therefore, these results may not be generalizable to other populations.
Recent addresses were stable, with 91% of participants reporting the
same address at the sixth and seventh examination cycles. Our PM2.5 data
are based on an average for the year 2001 similar to other large
epidemiological studies.12,31 This approach limits the influence of
secular trends in exposure, while capturing the spatial distribution of
average PM2.5. This study also has several strengths, including a
relatively large, communitybased sample, inclusion of both men and
women, quantitative brain MRI, and individual-level estimates of
exposures.

Conclusions We observed evidence suggesting that long-term exposure to
PM2.5 is associated with lower TCBV and more CBI among a community-based
sample of participants free of dementia and stroke. These findings
suggest that relatively low urban background levels of particulate air
pollution may contribute to the acceleration of atrophic changes and
small-vessel disease in older adults. Additional studies will be
necessary to confirm or refute these findings, extend the work to
include longitudinal assessments, and to determine factors that mediate
this association.

Sources of Funding This work was supported by grants from the National
Institutes of Health (NIH: ES022243, ES000002, AG008122, AG033193,
AG016495, NS017950, and N01 HC025195) and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA; RD834798). The content is solely
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
official views of the NIH or the USEPA. No funding organization had any
role in the design and conduct of the study; collection; management,
analysis and interpretation of the data; and preparation of the article.
Its contents are solely the responsibility of the grantee and do not
necessarily represent the official views of the funders. Furthermore,
USEPA does not endorse the purchase of any commercial products or
services mentioned in the publication.

Disclosures None.

References 1. Ljungman PL, Mittleman MA. Ambient air pollution and
stroke. Stroke. 2014;45:3734--3741. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.003130.
2. Power MC, Weisskopf MG, Alexeeff SE, Coull BA, Spiro A III, Schwartz
J. Traffic-related air pollution and cognitive function in a cohort of
older men. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119:682--687. doi: 10.1289/
ehp.1002767. 3. Weuve J, Puett RC, Schwartz J, Yanosky JD, Laden F,
Grodstein F. Exposure to particulate air pollution and cognitive decline
in older women. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172:219--227. doi: 10.1001/
archinternmed.2011.683. 4. Wellenius GA, Boyle LD, Wilker EH, Sorond FA,
Coull BA, Koutrakis P, et al. Ambient fine particulate matter alters
cerebral hemodynamics in the elderly. Stroke. 2013;44:1532--1536. doi:
10.1161/ STROKEAHA.111.000395. 5. Adar SD, Klein R, Klein BE, Szpiro AA,
Cotch MF, Wong TY, et al. Air Pollution and the microvasculature: a
cross-sectional assessment of in vivo retinal images in the
population-based multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis (MESA). PLoS Med.
2010;7:e1000372. doi: 10.1371/journal. pmed.1000372. 6. Adar SD,
Sheppard L, Vedal S, Polak JF, Sampson PD, Diez Roux AV, et al. Fine
particulate air pollution and the progression of carotid intimamedial
thickness: a prospective cohort study from the multi-ethnic study of
atherosclerosis and air pollution. PLoS Med. 2013;10:e1001430. doi:
10.1371/journal.pmed.1001430. 7. Iadecola C, Anrather J. The immunology
of stroke: from mechanisms to translation. Nat Med. 2011;17:796--808.
doi: 10.1038/nm.2399. 8. Elder A, Gelein R, Silva V, Feikert T,
Opanashuk L, Carter J, et al. Translocation of inhaled ultrafine
manganese oxide particles to the central nervous system. Environ Health
Perspect. 2006;114:1172--1178. 9. Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE,
Decarli C, Greenberg SM, Iadecola C, et al; American Heart Association
Stroke Council, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on
Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and
Intervention, and Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia.
Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a statement
for healthcare professionals from the american heart
association/american stroke association. Stroke. 2011;42:2672--2713.
doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3182299496. 10. Debette S, Beiser A, DeCarli C,
Au R, Himali JJ, Kelly-Hayes M, et al. Association of MRI markers of
vascular brain injury with incident stroke, mild cognitive impairment,
dementia, and mortality: the Framingham Offspring Study. Stroke.
2010;41:600--606. doi: 10.1161/ STROKEAHA.109.570044. 11. Kannel WB,
Feinleib M, McNamara PM, Garrison RJ, Castelli WP. An investigation of
coronary heart disease in families. The Framingham offspring study. Am J
Epidemiol. 1979;110:281--290. 12. Wilker EH, Ljungman PL, Rice MB, Kloog
I, Schwartz J, Gold DR, et al. Relation of long-term exposure to air
pollution to brachial artery flow-mediated dilation and reactive
hyperemia. Am J Cardiol. 2014;113:2057--2063. doi:
10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.03.048. 13. Kloog I, Nordio F, Coull BA, Schwartz
J. Incorporating local land use regression and satellite aerosol optical
depth in a hybrid model of spatiotemporal PM2.5 exposures in the
Mid-Atlantic states. Environ Sci Technol. 2012;46:11913--11921. doi:
10.1021/es302673e. 14. Jeerakathil T, Wolf PA, Beiser A, Massaro J,
Seshadri S, D'Agostino RB, et al. Stroke risk profile predicts white
matter hyperintensity volume: the Framingham Study. Stroke.
2004;35:1857--1861. doi: 10.1161/01. STR.0000135226.53499.85. 15.
DeCarli C, Massaro J, Harvey D, Hald J, Tullberg M, Au R, et al.
Measures of brain morphology and infarction in the framingham heart
study: establishing what is normal. Neurobiol Aging. 2005;26:491--510.
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2004.05.004. 16. Seshadri S, Wolf PA,
Beiser A, Elias MF, Au R, Kase CS, et al. Stroke risk profile, brain
volume, and cognitive function: the Framingham Offspring Study.
Neurology. 2004;63:1591--1599. 17. DeCarli C, Maisog J, Murphy DG,
Teichberg D, Rapoport SI, Horwitz B. Method for quantification of brain,
ventricular, and subarachnoid CSF volumes from MR images. J Comput
Assist Tomogr. 1992;16:274--284. 18. Au R, Massaro JM, Wolf PA, Young
ME, Beiser A, Seshadri S, et al. Association of white matter
hyperintensity volume with decreased

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on June 25, 2015

6  Stroke  May 2015 cognitive functioning: the Framingham Heart Study.
Arch Neurol. 2006;63:246--250. doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.2.246. 19.
DeCarli C, Miller BL, Swan GE, Reed T, Wolf PA, Garner J, et al.
Predictors of brain morphology for the men of the NHLBI twin study.
Stroke. 1999;30:529--536. 20. Cupples LA, D'Agostino RB. Some risk
factors related to the annual incidence of cardiovascular disease and
death using polled repeated biennial measurements. In: Kannel WB, Wolf
PA, Garrison RJ, eds. The Framingham Study: An Epidemiological
Investigation of Cardiovascular Disease. Bethesda, MD: National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute; 1987. National Institutes of Health
publication No. 87-2703. 21. Buis, ML. POSTRCSPLINE: Stata module
containing postestimation commands for models using a restricted cubic
spline [IDEAS Web site]. 2009.
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456928.html. Accessed September 13,
2014. 22. Vermeer SE, Den Heijer T, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A,
Breteler MM; Rotterdam Scan Study. Incidence and risk factors of silent
brain infarcts in the population-based Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke.
2003;34:392--396. 23. Bernick C, Kuller L, Dulberg C, Longstreth WT Jr,
Manolio T, Beauchamp N, et al; Cardiovascular Health Study Collaborative
Reseach Group. Silent MRI infarcts and the risk of future stroke: the
cardiovascular health study. Neurology. 2001;57:1222--1229. 24. Vermeer
SE, Prins ND, den Heijer T, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler MM. Silent
brain infarcts and the risk of dementia and cognitive decline. N Engl J
Med. 2003;348:1215--1222. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa022066. 25. Price TR,
Manolio TA, Kronmal RA, Kittner SJ, Yue NC, Robbins J, et al. Silent
brain infarction on magnetic resonance imaging and neurological
abnormalities in community-dwelling older adults. The Cardiovascular
Health Study. CHS Collaborative Research Group. Stroke.
1997;28:1158--1164. 26. Vermeer SE, Longstreth WT Jr, Koudstaal PJ.
Silent brain infarcts: a systematic review. Lancet Neurol.
2007;6:611--619. doi: 10.1016/ S1474-4422(07)70170-9. 27. Weinstein G,
Beiser AS, Decarli C, Au R, Wolf PA, Seshadri S. Brain imaging and
cognitive predictors of stroke and Alzheimer disease in the Framingham
Heart Study. Stroke. 2013;44:2787--2794. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.113.000947.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
     28.     McColl BW, Allan SM, Rothwell NJ. Systemic infection, inflammation
#+END_EXAMPLE

and acute ischemic stroke. Neuroscience. 2009;158:1049--1061. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.08.019. 29. Gorelick PB. Role of
inflammation in cognitive impairment: results of observational
epidemiological studies and clinical trials. Ann N Y Acad Sci.
2010;1207:155--162. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05726.x. 30. Jefferson
AL, Massaro JM, Wolf PA, Seshadri S, Au R, Vasan RS, et al. Inflammatory
biomarkers are associated with total brain volume: the Framingham Heart
Study. Neurology. 2007;68:1032--1038. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000257815.20548.df. 31. Miller KA, Siscovick DS,
Sheppard L, Shepherd K, Sullivan JH, Anderson GL, et al. Long-term
exposure to air pollution and incidence of cardiovascular events in
women. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:447--458. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa054409. 32.
Stafoggia M, Cesaroni G, Peters A, Andersen ZJ, Badaloni C, Beelen R, et
al. Long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and incidence of
cerebrovascular events: results from 11 European cohorts within the
ESCAPE project. Environ Health Perspect. 2014;122:919--925. doi:
10.1289/ ehp.1307301. 33. Wellenius GA, Boyle LD, Coull BA, Milberg WP,
Gryparis A, Schwartz J, et al. Residential proximity to nearest major
roadway and cognitive function in community-dwelling seniors: results
from the MOBILIZE Boston Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012;60:2075--2080.
doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04195.x. 34. Calderón-Garcidueñas L, Reed
W, Maronpot RR, Henríquez-Roldán C, Delgado-Chavez R,
Calderón-Garcidueñas A, et al. Brain inflammation and Alzheimer's-like
pathology in individuals exposed to severe air pollution. Toxicol
Pathol. 2004;32:650--658. doi: 10.1080/01926230490520232. 35.
Calderón-Garcidueñas L, Mora-Tiscareño A, Ontiveros E, Gómez-Garza G,
Barragán-Mejía G, Broadway J, et al. Air pollution, cognitive deficits
and brain abnormalities: a pilot study with children and dogs. Brain
Cogn. 2008;68:117--127. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2008.04.008. 36. Brochu PJ,
Yanosky JD, Paciorek CJ, Schwartz J, Chen JT, Herrick RF, et al.
Particulate air pollution and socioeconomic position in rural and urban
areas of the Northeastern United States. Am J Public Health.
2011;101(suppl 1):S224--S230. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2011.300232.

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on June 25, 2015

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

76

77

78

TCBV% 79

80

81

82

Supplemental Figure I: Non-linear association between PM2.5 and total
cerebral brain volume

8

10

12 14 3 PM2.5 (µg/m )

16

18

Model 1 adjusted results for association between PM2.5 (5 knots) and
total cerebral brain volume. The spline indicates a steeper slope at
lower levels of exposures. High levels of exposure were associated with
higher brain volume, though confidence intervals in this range of the
data were wide. Whether this pattern is due to a leveling off in the
exposure-response relationship, the influence of outliers, or residual
confounding remains unclear.

Long-Term Exposure to Fine Particulate Matter, Residential Proximity to
Major Roads and Measures of Brain Structure Elissa H. Wilker, Sarah R.
Preis, Alexa S. Beiser, Philip A. Wolf, Rhoda Au, Itai Kloog, Wenyuan
Li, Joel Schwartz, Petros Koutrakis, Charles DeCarli, Sudha Seshadri and
Murray A. Mittleman Stroke. published online April 23, 2015; Stroke is
published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue,
Dallas, TX 75231 Copyright © 2015 American Heart Association, Inc. All
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628

The online version of this article, along with updated information and
services, is located on the World Wide Web at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/early/2015/04/23/STROKEAHA.114.008348

Data Supplement (unedited) at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2015/04/24/STROKEAHA.114.008348.DC1.html

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or
portions of articles originally published in Stroke can be obtained via
RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the
Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for
which permission is being requested is located, click Request
Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further
information about this process is available in the Permissions and
Rights Question and Answer document. Reprints: Information about
reprints can be found online at: http://www.lww.com/reprints
Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Stroke is online at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical
Libraries Consortium on June 25, 2015


