Relation of Long-Term Exposure to Air Pollution to Brachial Artery
Flow-Mediated Dilation and Reactive Hyperemia Elissa H. Wilker,
ScDa,b,*, Petter L. Ljungman, MD, PhDa,c, Mary B. Rice, MDa,d, Itai
Kloog, PhDe, Joel Schwartz, PhDb, Diane R. Gold, MDb, Petros Koutrakis,
PhDb, Joseph A. Vita, MDf,g, Gary F. Mitchell, MDh, Ramachandran S.
Vasan, MDf,g,i, Emelia J. Benjamin, MD, ScMf,g, Naomi M. Hamburg, MDf,g,
and Murray A. Mittleman, MD, DrPHa,b Long-term exposure to ambient air
pollution has been associated with cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality. Impaired vascular responses may, in part, explain these
ﬁndings, but the association of such long-term exposure with measures of
both conduit artery and microvascular function has not been widely
reported. We evaluated the association between residential proximity to
a major roadway (primary or secondary highway) and spatially resolved
average ﬁne particulate matter (PM2.5) and baseline brachial artery
diameter and mean ﬂow velocity, ﬂow-mediated dilation%, and hyperemic
ﬂow velocity, in the Framingham Offspring and Third Generation Cohorts.
We examined 5,112 participants (2,731 [53%] women, mean age 49 -- 14
years). Spatially resolved average PM2.5 was associated with lower
ﬂow-mediated dilation% and hyperemic ﬂow velocity. An interquartile
range difference in PM2.5 (1.99 mg/m3) was associated with L0.16% (95%
conﬁdence interval [CI] L0.27%, L0.05%) lower ﬂow-mediated dilation% and
L0.72 (95% CI L1.38, L0.06) cm/s lower hyperemic ﬂow velocity%.
Residential proximity to a major roadway was negatively associated with
ﬂow-mediated dilation%. Compared with living ‡400 m away, living <50 m
from a major roadway was associated with 0.32% lower ﬂowmediated
dilation (95% CI L0.58%, L0.06%), but results for hyperemic ﬂow velocity
had wide conﬁdence intervals L0.68 cm/s (95% CI L2.29, 0.93). In
conclusion, residential proximity to a major roadway and higher levels
of spatially resolved estimates of PM2.5 at participant residences are
associated with impaired conduit artery and microvascular function in
this large community-based cohort of middle-aged and elderly adults. Ó
2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. (Am J Cardiol
2014;113:2057e2063) Flow-mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery
is a noninvasive measure of large conduit artery function that is a
predictor of cardiovascular events.1,2 Previous studies describing the
effects of ambient pollutants on FMD are limited, but a few small
studies, in controlled settings or in susceptible populations, have
examined short-term exposure to air pollution and have observed mixed
results.3e6 A recent study reported an association between long-term
exposures to ambient particulate matter (PM2.5) and impaired conduit
artery function as indicated by lower brachial artery FMD%.7 Evidence
also suggests that long-term exposure to higher levels of PM2.5 may be
associated with damage to the microvasculature,

including reduced retinal vessel diameter.8 However, studies of the
long-term implications of residential exposure to ambient pollution on
vascular measures remain limited, particularly at lower levels of PM2.5,
and little is known about associations with microvessel vasodilator
function. We hypothesized that residential proximity to major roadways
and long-term exposure to spatially resolved average PM2.5 in an urban
and suburban region with relatively low levels that are in compliance
with contemporary regulatory limits would be associated with impaired
conduit artery and microvascular function. We examined associations
between residential proximity to major roadways and spatially resolved
average PM2.5 at the home

a Cardiovascular Epidemiology Research Unit, Department of Medicine,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; bDepartment
of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts; cInstitute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; dPulmonary and Critical Care Unit,
Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts; eDepartment of Geography and Environmental Development,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; fNHLBI and
Boston University's Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, Massachusetts;
gWhitaker Cardiovascular Institute, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; hCardiovascular Engineering Inc.,
Norwood, Massachusetts; and iSections of Preventive Medicine and
Epidemiology and Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. Manuscript received December
20, 2013; revised manuscript received and accepted March 20, 2014.

This work was supported by the NHLBI (N01HC 25195, 1R01HL60040,
1R01HL70100), the USEPA (RD834798), and NIEHS (ES009825, ES022243,
ES023352, and ES000002), Swedish Council for Working Life and Social
Research, Marie Curie International Postdoctoral Fellowship Programme,
the Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation, the Swedish Society of Cardiology,
and the Swedish Society for Medical Research. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
ofﬁcial views of the NIH or the EPA. Further, the NIH and USEPA do not
endorse the purchase of any commercial products or services mentioned in
the publication. See page 2063 for disclosure information.
*Corresponding author: Tel: (617) 632-7654; fax: (617) 632-7698. E-mail
address: ewilker@bidmc.harvard.edu (E.H. Wilker).

0002-9149/14/$ - see front matter Ó 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.03.048

www.ajconline.org

2058

The American Journal of Cardiology (www.ajconline.org)

address of participants in the Framingham Offspring and Third Generation
Cohorts who underwent measures of brachial function and hyperemic ﬂow
velocity. Methods The design of the Framingham Offspring Study and Third
Generation Studies has been described in detail elsewhere.9,10
Participants who attended Examination 7 of the Offspring Study (1998 to
2001) or Examination 1 of the Third Generation Study (2002 to 2005) and
also completed the brachial examination were eligible for inclusion in
this analysis. All participants provided written informed consent for
the Framingham Heart Study examinations, and both the Committee on
Clinical Investigation at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and the
Institutional review board at the Boston Medical Center approved the
study protocol. There were 5,719 participants for whom residential
proximity to roadway and PM2.5 data were available. We then excluded 37
addresses identiﬁed as zip-code centroid or street midpoint and 570
participants who smoked within 6 hours of the examination, leaving a
total of 5,112 eligible participants, of whom 2,828 were participants in
the Third Generation Study (55%). Participant primary addresses were
geocoded using ArcGIS 10 (ESRI, Redlands, California).
Neighborhood-level socioeconomic characteristics, including median
household income, were assigned at the census tract level from US Census
2000 data. Distance to nearest major road was determined by residential
proximity to the nearest A1, A2, or A3 road (US Census Features Class)
at the time of the brachial examination (Offspring Examination 7, Third
Generation Examination 1). Based on previous work showing that particle
levels diminish to background levels 100 to 300 m from major roads,11 we
ﬁrst examined associations using categories of distance: <50 m, 50 to
<100 m, 100 to <200 m, 200 to <400 m, and 400 to <1,000 m. These
categories were selected a priori to reﬂect the decay function of trafﬁc
pollution and noise as proximity to roadway decreases to background
levels. We also tested the natural logarithm of the proximity to a major
roadway and brachial function because it is associated linearly with
mortality.12 Participants living farther than 1,000 m from a major road
in rural areas beyond background were excluded from the roadway analyses
(530 participants, 10%). Our approach utilizes Moderate Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer satellite-derived aerosol optical density
(AOD) measurements to predict daily PM2.5 concentration levels at a 10 
10 km spatial resolution across New England. Starting in 2000, AOD was
calibrated daily using ground PM2.5 measurements from 78 monitoring
stations, land use regression, and meteorological variables
(temperature, wind speed, visibility, elevation, distance to major
roads, percent of open space, point emissions, and area emissions). To
estimate PM2.5 daily concentrations in each grid cell, we ﬁrst
calibrated the AODePM2.5 relation with data from grid cells including
both monitor and AOD values using mixed models with random slopes for
day and nested regions. Next, we estimated exposures on days when AOD
measures were not available (e.g., due to cloud coverage or snow). A
model was ﬁt with a smooth function of latitude and longitude and a
random intercept for each cell that takes

Table 1 Characteristics of study participants Clinical Characteristics
Age at examination (years) Female Body mass index (kg/m2) Systolic blood
pressure (mm Hg) Diastolic blood pressure (mm Hg) Heart rate (beats per
minute) Triglycerides (mg/dL) Total cholesterol/HDL Diabetes mellitus
Hypertension medications Lipid medications Postmenopausal hormone use
Current smokers Former smokers Education (years) <High school degree
High school degree Some college, technical school, or associate's degree
Bachelor's degree or higher Missing Third generation Vascular measures
Baseline brachial diameter (mm) Flow-mediated dilation (%) Baseline mean
ﬂow (cm/s) Hyperemic mean ﬂow (cm/s)

Mean  SD or n (%) 49  14 2731 (53%) 27.6  5.4 122  17 75  10 63 
10 125  92 3.9  1.4 360 (7%) 1062 (21%) 724 (14%) 488 (10%) 371 (7%)
2124 (42%) 121 (2%) 1063 (21%) 1584 (31%) 2294 (45%) 50 (1%) 2828 (55%)
4.2 4.5 7.5 57.2

   

0.9 3.6 4.3 20.4

Table 2 Distributions of ﬁne particulate matter exposures and proximity
to roadway measures Exposure

Median (IQR) or n (%)

Proximity to major roadway (m)/ 197 Fine particulate matter (mg/m3) 10.9
Residential proximity in Categories (meters) 50 1034 50 to <100 463 100
to <200 816 200 to <400 1088 400 to <1000 1181 1000/ 530

346) (1.99)

Range 0.05e999.7 7.3e21.7

(20%) (9%) (16%) (21%) (23%) (10%)

IQR indicates interquartile range. * 530 (10%) excluded because analyses
were restricted to patients living up to 1,000 m from a major road.

advantage of associations between grid cell AOD values and PM2.5 data
from monitors located elsewhere and associations with available AOD
values in neighboring grid cells. We averaged each daily concentration
for the year 2001 in the 10  10 km grid cell for each home address. The
year 2001 was selected because it falls between the Offspring Cycle 7
(1998 to 2001) and Third Generation Examination 1 (2002 to 2005) data
collection and complete data were available. The ﬁrst model calibrations
resulted in high outof-sample 10-fold cross-validated R2 (mean
out-of-sample R2 ¼ 0.83). Even with days without any AOD data, our model
presented extremely high ﬁts (R2 ¼ 0.81). We also evaluated the spatial
and temporal components of the model

Miscellaneous/Air Pollution and Conduit and Microvascular Function

2059

Table 3 Baseline-Long-term exposures to ambient air pollution and
measures of baseline brachial diameter and baseline mean ﬂow (cm/s)
Model 2†

Model 1* Estimate Baseline brachial diameter (mm)z Categories of
residential proximity to major road <50 m 0.02 50 to <100 m 0.09 100 to
<200 m 0.01 200 to <400 m 0.05 Distance400m --- Log of distance to
major road (m)x 0.01 PM2.5 (mg/m3)k 0.01 Baseline ﬂow (cm/s){
Categories of residential proximity to major road <50 m 0.05 50 to <100
m 0.06 100 to <200 m 0.10 200 to <400 m 0.14 Distance400 m --- Log of
distance to major road (m)x 0.01 PM2.5 (mg/m3)k 0.03

95% CI

p Value

Estimate

95%CI

p Value

[0.02, 0.07][0.03, 0.15] [0.03, 0.06][0.01, 0.09] --- [0.03,
0.01][0.01, 0.03]

0.42

0.03 0.09 0.02 0.05 --- 0.01 0.01

[0.02, 0.07][0.03, 0.15] [0.03, 0.07][0.01, 0.10] --- [0.03,
0.01][0.01, 0.03]

0.38

0.07 0.03 0.06 0.17 --- 0.02 0.03

[0.43, 0.29][0.50, 0.44] [0.33, 0.45][0.53, 0.18] --- [0.15,
0.20][0.17, 0.12]

[0.42, 0.32][0.53, 0.42] [0.30, 0.49][0.50, 0.23] --- [0.16,
0.19][0.18, 0.12]

--- 0.38 0.25

0.94

--- 0.87 0.72

0.34 0.25

0.94

0.78 0.73

BMI ¼ body mass index. * Adjusted for age, age2, BMI, sex, cohort,
smoking status (never, former, current), date of examination,
individual-level education (no high school diploma, high school degree,
some college, technical school or associate's degree, and bachelor's
degree or higher), median household income (quartiles), and sine and
cosine of season. † Adjusted for model 1 variables and walk test
administered before brachial examination, history of diabetes,
lipid-lowering medications, antihypertensive medications current
postmenopausal hormone use, a history of cardiovascular disease,
systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, heart rate,
triglycerides, and total cholesterol/HDL ratio. z Model 1 results
include 4,574 observations for distance to roadway analyses and 5,104
for PM2.5. Model 2 results include 4,557 observations for distance to
roadway and 5,083 for PM2.5. x Natural logarithm of proximity to a major
road scaled to the difference between living 50 m to the living 400 m
away. k PM2.5 scaled to IQR (1.99 mg/m3). { Model 1 results include
4,036 observations for distance to roadway analyses and 4,528 for PM2.5.
Model 2 results include 4,020 observations for distance to roadway and
4,508 for PM2.5.

separately, which also resulted in very high ﬁts (R2 of spatial
component ¼ 0.78 and temporal component ¼ 0.84). We then used local land
use terms (distance to primary highways, distance to point source
emissions, population density, percent open spaces, elevation, and
trafﬁc density) to model the difference between the 10  10 km grid cell
predictions and monitored values. We regressed the residuals for each
monitor against local land use characteristics for each monitor and a
smooth function of trafﬁc density. The sum of the grid cell predictions
and residuals from the land use model represents a measure of total
PM2.5 at a speciﬁc location within a 50  50 m grid. This further
increased the overall model R2 by 1.9%. Fasting brachial artery tracings
were measured by 1 of the 3 experienced sonographers following rigorous
standardized protocols13 and were acquired for participants in
Framingham Offspring Examination 7 and Third Generation Examination 1.
Baseline diameter, FMD% (percent change in diameter from baseline),
baseline mean ﬂow velocity, and mean hyperemic ﬂow velocity were
determined as the outcomes of interest. Hyperemic ﬂow velocity was
assessed using midartery pulse Doppler signal. FMD%, and reactive
hyperemia as measured by hyperemic ﬂow velocity may reﬂect, in part,
decreased endothelial-dependent vasodilation mediated by NO in the
conduit and forearm microvessels, respectively.14

Investigators measured brachial artery diameter at baseline and 1 minute
after reactive hyperemia induced by 5-minute forearm cuff occlusion
using commercially available software (Brachial Analyzer v. 3.2.3,
Medical Imaging Applications). Doppler ﬂow was assessed at baseline and
during reactive hyperemia. Mean baseline and hyperemic ﬂow velocities
were analyzed from digitized audio data with semi-automated signal
averaging (Cardiovascular Engineering). Reproducibility of the approach
is extremely high and has been described elsewhere.13,15 Flow
measurements were available for a subset of participants because
measures began after the Offspring 7th Examination cycle had started. Of
the 5,112 eligible participants, there were 498 offspring participants
(22%) in whom ﬂow was not measured and 79 (3%) missing ﬂow data in the
Third Generation Cohort. History of cardiovascular disease (coronary
heart disease, intermittent leg claudication, heart failure or stroke,
or transient ischemic attack) was determined by a panel of 3
investigators using previously published criteria.16 At Examination 7,
participants were asked about antihypertension and lipid-lowering
medication, and postmenopausal hormone use. In the Third Generation
Examination 1, participants brought their medications, and these were
coded according to their World Health Organization anatomical
therapeutic chemical codes. We used the anatomical

2060

The American Journal of Cardiology (www.ajconline.org)

Table 4 Hyperemic responseelong-term exposures to ambient air pollution
and measures of FMD (%) and hyperemic ﬂow velocity (cm/s) Model 2†

Model 1* Estimate Flow-mediated dilation (%)z Categories of residential
proximity to major road <50 m 0.34 50 to <100 m 0.33 100 to <200 m
0.02 200 to <400 m 0.23 Distance 400 m --- Log of distance to major
roadx 0.15 PM2.5 (mg/m3)k 0.16 Hyperemic ﬂow velocity (cm/s){
Categories of residential proximity to major road <50 m 0.81 50 to <100
m 1.25 100 to <200 m 0.34 200 to <400 m 0.53 Distance 400 m --- Log of
distance to major roadx 0.56 PM2.5k 0.79

95% CI

p Value

Estimate

95% CI

p Value

[0.60, 0.08][0.67, 0.00] [0.30, 0.26][0.48, 0.03] --- [0.02,
0.27][0.27, 0.05]

0.01

0.32 0.28 0.004 0.16 --- 0.15 0.16

[0.58, 0.06][0.61, 0.05] [0.27, 0.28][0.41, 0.09] --- [0.02,
0.27][0.27, 0.05]

0.01

[2.44, 0.82][3.34, 0.84] [1.41, 2.08][1.07, 2.12] --- [0.21,
1.33][1.46, 0.12]

0.14

0.68 1.02 0.44 0.88 --- 0.59 0.72

[2.29, 0.93][3.08, 1.05] [1.28, 2.16][0.70, 2.46] --- [0.17,
1.36][1.38, 0.06]

--- 0.02 0.003

--- 0.15 0.02

--- 0.02 0.004

0.14

0.13 0.03

BMI ¼ body mass index. * Adjusted for age, age2, BMI, sex, cohort,
smoking status (never, former, current), date of examination,
individual-level education (no high school diploma, high school degree,
some college, technical school or associate's degree, and bachelor's
degree or higher), median household income (quartiles), sine and cosine
of season. † Adjusted for model 1 variables and walk test administered
before brachial examination, history of diabetes, lipid-lowering
medications, antihypertensive medications current postmenopausal hormone
use, a history of cardiovascular disease, systolic blood pressure,
diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, triglycerides, and total
cholesterol/HDL ratio. z Model 1 results include 4,574 observations for
distance to roadway analyses and 5,104 for PM2.5. Model 2 results
include 4,557 observations for distance to roadway and 5,083 for PM2.5.
x Natural logarithm of proximity to a major road scaled to the
difference between living 50 m to the living 400 m away. k PM2.5 scaled
to IQR (1.99 mg/m3). { Model 1 results include 4,036 observations for
distance to roadway analyses and 4,528 for PM2.5. Model 2 results
include 4,020 observations for distance to roadway and 4,508 for PM2.5.

therapeutic chemical codes to classify antihypertensive, lipidlowering
drugs and postmenopausal hormone use. Prevalent diabetes was deﬁned as
having a fasting glucose 126 mg/dl or oral hypoglycemic or insulin use
at an examination or any previous history of diabetes (excluding
gestational diabetes). Systolic and diastolic seated blood pressures
were calculated as the mean of 2 measurements taken by the physician
administering the clinical exam. Linear regression was used to evaluate
associations between ambient pollutants (near roadway measures and
PM2.5) and brachial measures (baseline brachial diameter [mm], FMD (%),
baseline mean ﬂow velocity (cm/s), and hyperemic ﬂow velocity [cm/s]).
Associations were ﬁrst modeled using a parsimonious approach (Model 1)
adjusting for age, age2, sex, body mass index, individual-level
education (no high school diploma, high school degree, some college,
technical school or associate's degree, and bachelor's degree or
higher), date of examination, median household income from 2000 census
tract (quartiles), cohort (Offspring or Third Generation), smoking
status, and seasonality (sine and cosine of day of year). We next
adjusted for additional covariates that have been associated with
brachial measures in previous studies of this sample.13,17 Model 2
covariates added to those included in Model 1 were walk test
administered before brachial examination, history of diabetes,
lipid-lowering medications,

antihypertensive medications, current postmenopausal hormone use, a
history of cardiovascular disease, systolic blood pressure, diastolic
blood pressure, heart rate, triglycerides, and total
cholesterol/high-density lipoprotein (HDL) ratio. We then evaluated the
linearity of exposure-response relations for the log of distance to
roadway and PM2.5 measures using restricted cubic splines with knots at
the 5, 27.5, 50, 72.5, and 95 percentiles of the distribution. We
hypothesized that associations between exposure to ambient air pollution
and vascular function may differ by factors related to sex, history of
diabetes, current smoking status, and age >65 years (n ¼ 776) and median
household income at the census tract level below the ﬁrst quartile
($48,973). We, therefore, tested for statistical interaction using
cross-product terms and determined statistical significance from the p
value from the Wald test of the cross-product. We also hypothesized that
regular use of vasoactive medication would alter the association between
long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and vascular response;
therefore, we evaluated stratiﬁcation by the use of antihypertensive and
statin drug use. We performed several sensitivity analyses. Two outliers
were identiﬁed in the distribution of PM2.5 exposures (19 mg/m3), and
analyses were conducted excluding these observations. We also analyzed
the associations with PM2.5

Miscellaneous/Air Pollution and Conduit and Microvascular Function

2061

Figure 1. Associations between distance to major road and PM2.5 with FMD
and hyperemic ﬂow velocity using restricted cubic splines (knots ¼ 5)/.
/Multivariable-adjusted associations between the natural logarithm of
distance from a major road and PM2.5 and measures of ﬂow-mediated
dilation and hyperemic ﬂow velocity. Models were adjusted for all Model
2 covariates. There were no substantial deviations from linearity for
the associations evaluated.

among participants who lived within 1,000 m of a major road. Previous
studies have used different approaches to account for the fact that FMD
is calculated as a ratio, and the denominator (baseline brachial artery
diameter) may be associated with air pollution exposure.3,7 We therefore
adjusted our FMD% results ﬁrst by hyperemic ﬂow velocity and then by
1/baseline diameter. To account for potential clustering of the observed
brachial outcomes by neighborhood-level characteristics, analyses were
also conducted using generalized estimating equations with exchangeable
covariance structure to examine the associations after accounting for
census tract. For models in which we examined residential proximity to
roadway in 5 categories, tests for linear trends were performed by
assigning each exposure category the natural log of the median distance
within each category and including the term as a continuous variable in
the regression model. The p value obtained represents the log-linear
component of trend (p trend). We present the results of log-linear
residential proximity to major roadway analyses by contrasting
participants who live 50 m from the nearest major roadway to those
living 400 m away from the nearest major road to reﬂect the
mean-adjusted difference in brachial measures between participants
likely to have high levels of exposure to trafﬁc-related pollution
versus those exposed to nearbackground levels. This calculation was
performed by scaling the beta coefﬁcient such that ln(400 m) /b  ln (50
m) /b ¼ ln(400/50) *b, where b denotes the beta coefﬁcient from the
linear regression model treating log of distance to roadway as a linear
continuous variable. Results for models of PM2.5 are scaled to an
interquartile range (IQR) for the observed distribution in our data. All
analyses were conducted in Stata v.12 (Statacorp, College Station,
Texas) and R 2.13.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing,

Vienna, Austria, MGCV, 1.7-22). Plots were created using the
POSTRCSPLINE package in Stata.18 All statistical tests were 2 sided, and
p <0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant. Results Participant
characteristics are listed in Table 1. Among participants who reported
their race (n ¼ 4,790), there were 17 participants who reported a race
other than white (<1%). Compared with other participants, participants
in whom hyperemic ﬂow was not measured did not differ by age, blood
pressure, prevalence of diabetes mellitus, baseline diameter, or FMD%.
The exposure distribution is listed in Table 2. Analyses examining
residential proximity to a major roadway as the exposure of interest
excluded participants living >1,000 m from a major road (530
participants, 10%). Neither residential proximity to a major roadway nor
PM2.5 was associated with baseline brachial diameter or mean ﬂow
velocity. Associations with categories of distance to roadway showed no
consistent pattern (Table 3). We observed consistent associations
between PM2.5 and both FMD% and hyperemic ﬂow velocity. We also observed
log-linear associations between residential proximity to a major roadway
and FMD% (Table 4). Upon examination of the exposure-response relations
for FMD% and hyperemic ﬂow velocity, we observed no evidence of
departure from linearity (Figure 1). In multivariable-adjusted models,
living at a location with higher PM2.5 was associated with both impaired
FMD% and hyperemic ﬂow velocity. In plots of residential proximity to a
major road, a steeper slope was observed for FMD% than for hyperemic ﬂow
velocity, which was consistent with the

2062

The American Journal of Cardiology (www.ajconline.org)

ﬁndings from our analyses that examined the log-linear association and
trend tests. There was no evidence of differences in the observed
associations between proximity to roadway or PM2.5 and FMD% or hyperemic
ﬂow velocity according to sex, diabetes, age>65 years, current smoking
status, or median income of the participants' census tract. There were
also no differences when we stratiﬁed by antihypertensive and
lipidlowering medication use. Results were not materially altered when
we excluded the 2 outliers from the PM2.5 distribution or restricted our
PM2.5 analyses to people living within 1,000 m of a major road, when we
adjusted for hyperemic ﬂow velocity or 1/baseline brachial diameter, or
when we analyzed the data accounting for clustering by census tract
using generalized estimating equations. Discussion In this
community-based study of patients residing in urban and suburban areas
who were exposed to relatively low levels of particulate air pollution
within contemporary regulated limits, we observed that both residential
proximity to a major roadway and long-term estimated exposure to PM2.5
were associated with impaired FMD%, a measure of conduit artery
function. PM2.5 was also associated with poorer microvascular function
as assessed by hyperemic ﬂow velocity. Our results suggest that
long-term exposure to particulates and trafﬁc-related sources of air
pollution is associated with subclinical changes that adversely affect
the conduit artery and may also impair microvascular function. The
associations that we observed for FMD% were not attenuated when we
adjusted for baseline diameter or hyperemic ﬂow velocity and did not
differ substantially across potentially susceptible or vulnerable
subgroups. Although the magnitude of the effect sizes that we observed
for FMD% was small on the absolute scale, the association between living
within 50 m of a major road and FMD% was similar in magnitude to 10 mm
Hg higher systolic blood pressure in a previous study of the Framingham
Offspring participants.13 Our results are consistent with the one
previously published study of the association between long-term exposure
to air pollution and brachial function.7 Most previous studies of
ambient air pollution exposures and FMD have focused on short-term
effects. Controlled human studies have shown associations between
exposure to diesel or concentrated ambient particles and ozone with
smaller baseline brachial diameter3,4,6 but no difference in FMD. Flow
velocity measured in the brachial artery is, in part, determined by
downstream resistance, which is regulated by microvascular function. To
our knowledge, no previously published studies have evaluated long-term
exposure to air pollution and measures of hyperemic ﬂow velocity. A
previous study examined pollutant levels on the day of and 5 days
preceding brachial artery testing and found that gaseous pollutants were
associated with impaired ﬂowmediated brachial artery dilation, whereas
PM2.5, PM10, and NO2 were associated with small artery reactive
hyperemia after hand ischemia.19 In our study, consistent negative
associations were observed between PM2.5 and both FMD% and hyperemic ﬂow
velocity. Differences in time windows of exposure assessed, brachial
testing protocols, age, and

sex of participants could play a role in explaining these ﬁndings. One
study reported no association between short-term exposure to secondhand
smoke and microvascular endothelial-dependent vasodilation,20 but others
have reported narrower retinal diameter, a measure of microvascular
function, with short- and long-term exposures.8,21 Animal models suggest
that inhalation of nanoparticles is associated with lower NO
bioavailability in the microvasculature and higher levels of reactive
oxygen and nitrogen species 22 However, the mechanisms for associations
between long-term exposures to ambient air pollution and hyperemic ﬂow
velocity are still not well understood. The patterns in associations
that we observed across the 2 hyperemic response outcomes were generally
similar for both PM2.5 and residential proximity to a major road.
Although the association between residential proximity to a major road
and FMD% showed that living 50 m away was associated with poorer
response than living 400 m away, the association with hyperemic ﬂow
velocity was not statistically signiﬁcant. We hypothesized that this
could be due to differences in the features of long-term exposure to air
pollution captured by these 2 approaches. Residential proximity to a
major roadway is an integrated measure that is correlated with higher
levels of trafﬁc-related particulate air pollution and ultraﬁne
particles, but this measure does not account for the intensity of trafﬁc
at a given location or meteorology. In contrast, our modeled PM2.5
exposure data takes both locally and regionally generated sources into
account, including trafﬁc density, elevation, and other land use, which
may, in part, explain narrower conﬁdence intervals observed. Further
work is needed to elucidate the underlying biology of the effects of
near roadway exposures and PM2.5 mass composition on microvascular
function and to evaluate differences in biological mechanisms related to
the sources and composition of exposure. It is also possible that
differences are due to more limited power resulting from a smaller
sample size, because evaluation of hyperemic ﬂow velocity began after
the start of Examination 7, and therefore, data were not collected on
22% of offspring participants or because analyses of residential
proximity to a major road were restricted to participants living within
1,000 m of a major road, although restricting our PM2.5 analyses to this
region did not materially change our results. Our study has several
limitations. Although we accounted for individual-level and area-level
characteristics of education and median household income, we cannot
exclude possible residual confounding by socioeconomic or other
characteristics. However, the results from our analysis that took
spatial clustering by census tract into account were similar to those
from the multivariable-adjusted results and are supported by a recent
study that showed that correlations between socioeconomic position and
PM2.5 exposures are low within urban areas.23 We do not have data on
time activity patterns reﬂective of microenvironments, which may have
led to exposure misclassiﬁcation, potentially biasing results toward the
null. Because our study was performed with community-based volunteers,
it would not have been appropriate to administer an NO donor as previous
smaller, clinic-based studies have done, and we cannot distinguish
between endothelium dependent and independent mechanisms. Also, we did
not withhold medications that act upon

Miscellaneous/Air Pollution and Conduit and Microvascular Function

the cardiovascular system before the brachial examination, although we
note that similar results were observed when we restricted to those
participants not using statins and antihypertensive medications, and
data suggest that there are no major differences in brachial reactivity
measures after acutely withholding non-nitrate vasoactive medications in
subjects taking these medications long-term.24 Our study did not include
repeated measures from study participants; therefore we cannot infer
causality. Our PM2.5 data are based on an average for the year 2001 as a
surrogate for long-term exposure. Using a 1-year average of long-term
exposure is an approach that has been used in other cohort studies.7,25
This approach limits the inﬂuence of secular trends in exposure while
capturing the rank ordering of the spatial distribution of average PM2.5
level at the residence of study participants. Finally, these results may
not be generalizable to other populations and people living in other
geographic areas. Acknowledgment: We wish to thank the Framingham
Offspring and Third Generation Study Participants. Disclosures The
authors have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose. 1. Gokce N, Keaney JF
Jr, Hunter LM, Watkins MT, Nedeljkovic ZS, Menzoian JO, Vita JA.
Predictive value of noninvasively determined endothelial dysfunction for
long-term cardiovascular events in patients with peripheral vascular
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:1769e1775. 2. Yeboah J, Crouse JR,
Hsu FC, Burke GL, Herrington DM. Brachial ﬂowmediated dilation predicts
incident cardiovascular events in older adults: the Cardiovascular
Health Study. Circulation 2007;115:2390e2397. 3. Brook RD, Brook JR,
Urch B, Vincent R, Rajagopalan S, Silverman F. Inhalation of ﬁne
particulate air pollution and ozone causes acute arterial
vasoconstriction in healthy adults. Circulation 2002;105:1534e1536. 4.
Dales R, Liu L, Szyszkowicz M, Dalipaj M, Willey J, Kulka R, Ruddy TD.
Particulate air pollution and vascular reactivity: the bus stop study.
Int Arch Occup Environ Health 2007;81:159e164. 5. O'Neill MS, Veves A,
Zanobetti A, Sarnat JA, Gold DR, Economides PA, Horton ES, Schwartz J.
Diabetes enhances vulnerability to particulate air pollution-associated
impairment in vascular reactivity and endothelial function. Circulation
2005;111:2913e2920. 6. Peretz A, Sullivan JH, Leotta DF, Trenga CA,
Sands FN, Allen J, Carlsten C, Wilkinson CW, Gill EA, Kaufman JD. Diesel
exhaust inhalation elicits acute vasoconstriction in vivo. Environ
Health Perspect 2008;116:937e942. 7. Krishnan RM, Adar SD, Szpiro AA,
Jorgensen NW, Van Hee VC, Barr RG, O'Neill MS, Herrington DM, Polak JF,
Kaufman JD. Vascular responses to long- and short-term exposure to ﬁne
particulate matter: MESA Air (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis and
Air Pollution). J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;60:2158e2166. 8. Adar SD, Klein
R, Klein BE, Szpiro AA, Cotch MF, Wong TY, O'Neill MS, Shrager S, Barr
RG, Siscovick DS, Daviglus ML, Sampson PD, Kaufman JD. Air pollution and
the microvasculature: a cross-sectional assessment of in vivo retinal
images in the populationbased multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis
(MESA). PLoS Med 2010;7: e1000372.

2063

9.  Feinleib M, Kannel WB, Garrison RJ, McNamara PM, Castelli WP. The
    Framingham offspring study. Design and preliminary data. Prev Med
    1975;4:518e525.
10. Splansky GL, Corey D, Yang Q, Atwood LD, Cupples LA, Benjamin EJ,
    D'Agostino RB Sr, Fox CS, Larson MG, Murabito JM, O'Donnell CJ,
    Vasan RS, Wolf PA, Levy D. The Third Generation Cohort of the
    National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham heart study:
    design, recruitment, and initial examination. Am J Epidemiol
    2007;165: 1328e1335.
11. Zhou Y, Levy JI. Factors inﬂuencing the spatial extent of mobile
    source air pollution impacts: a meta-analysis. BMC Public Health
    2007;7:89.
12. Rosenbloom JI, Wilker EH, Mukamal KJ, Schwartz J, Mittleman MA.
    Residential proximity to major roadway and 10-year all-cause
    mortality after myocardial infarction. Circulation
    2012;125:2197e2203.
13. Benjamin EJ, Larson MG, Keyes MJ, Mitchell GF, Vasan RS, Keaney JF
    Jr, Lehman BT, Fan S, Osypiuk E, Vita JA. Clinical correlates and
    heritability of ﬂow-mediated dilation in the community: the
    Framingham Heart study. Circulation 2004;109:613e619.
14. Flammer AJ, Anderson T, Celermajer DS, Creager MA, Deanﬁeld J, Ganz
    P, Hamburg NM, Luscher TF, Shechter M, Taddei S, Vita JA, Lerman A.
    The assessment of endothelial function: from research into clinical
    practice. Circulation 2012;126:753e767.
15. Parikh NI, Keyes MJ, Larson MG, Pou KM, Hamburg NM, Vita JA,
    O'Donnell CJ, Vasan RS, Mitchell GF, Hoffmann U, Fox CS, Benjamin
    EJ. Visceral and subcutaneous adiposity and brachial artery
    vasodilator function. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2009;17:2054e2059.
16. Cupples LA, D'Agostino R. Some risk factors related to the annual
    incidence of cardiovascular disease and death using pooled repeated
    biennial measurements: Framingham Study, 30-year follow-up. In:
    Kannel WB, Polf P, Garrison R, eds. The Framingham study: An
    epidemiological investigation of cardiovascular disease. Washington,
    D.C.: National Institutes of Health, 1987:87e203.
17. Mitchell GF, Parise H, Vita JA, Larson MG, Warner E, Keaney JF Jr,
    Keyes MJ, Levy D, Vasan RS, Benjamin EJ. Local shear stress and
    brachial artery ﬂow-mediated dilation: the Framingham Heart Study.
    Hypertension 2004;44:134e139.
18. Buis M. POSTRCSPLINE: Stata module containing post-estimation
    commands for models using a restricted cubic spline 2009. Available
    at: http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456928.html. Accessed
    September 13, 2013.
19. Briet M, Collin C, Laurent S, Tan A, Azizi M, Agharazii M,
    Jeunemaitre X, Alhenc-Gelas F, Boutouyrie P. Endothelial function
    and chronic exposure to air pollution in normal male subjects.
    Hypertension 2007;50:970e976.
20. Bard RL, Dvonch JT, Kaciroti N, Lustig SA, Brook RD. Is acute
    highdose secondhand smoke exposure always harmful to microvascular
    function in healthy adults? Prev Cardiol 2010;13:175e179.
21. Louwies T, Panis LI, Kicinski M, De Boever P, Nawrot TS. Retinal
    microvascular responses to short-term changes in particulate air
    pollution in healthy adults. Environ Health Perspect
    2013;121:1011e1016.
22. Nurkiewicz TR, Porter DW, Hubbs AF, Stone S, Chen BT, Frazer DG,
    Boegehold MA, Castranova V. Pulmonary nanoparticle exposure disrupts
    systemic microvascular nitric oxide signaling. Toxicol Sci
    2009;110:191e203.
23. Brochu PJ, Yanosky JD, Paciorek CJ, Schwartz J, Chen JT, Herrick RF,
    Suh HH. Particulate air pollution and socioeconomic position in
    rural and urban areas of the Northeastern United States. Am J Public
    Health 2011;101(Suppl 1):S224eS230.
24. Gokce N, Holbrook M, Hunter LM, Palmisano J, Vigalok E, Keaney JF
    Jr, Vita JA. Acute effects of vasoactive drug treatment on brachial
    artery reactivity. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002;40:761e765.
25. Miller KA, Siscovick DS, Sheppard L, Shepherd K, Sullivan JH,
    Anderson GL, Kaufman JD. Long-term exposure to air pollution and
    incidence of cardiovascular events in women. N Engl J Med
    2007;356:447e458.


