Downloaded from oem.bmj.com on April 5, 2014 - Published by
group.bmj.com

Environment

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Associations between arrhythmia episodes and temporally and spatially
resolved black carbon and particulate matter in elderly patients
Antonella Zanobetti,1 Brent A Coull,2 Alexandros Gryparis,3 Itai
Kloog,1,4 David Sparrow,5 Pantel S Vokonas,5 Robert O Wright,1,6 Diane R
Gold,1,6 Joel Schwartz1 1

Environmental Epidemiology and Risk Program, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 2 Department of Biostatistics,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 3 Department
of Hygiene, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, University of Athens
Medical School, Athens, Greece 4 The Department of Geography and
Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer
Sheva, Israel 5 Department of Medicine, VA Normative Aging Study,
Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 6 Channing Laboratory, Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA Correspondence to Dr Antonella Zanobetti,
Department of Environmental Health, Exposure Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Harvard School of Public Health, 401 Park Drive, Landmark
Center, Suite 415, P.O. Box 15698, Boston, MA 02215, USA;
azanobet@hsph.harvard.edu Received 21 March 2013 Revised 4 September
2013 Accepted 25 September 2013 Published Online First 18 October 2013

To cite: Zanobetti A, Coull BA, Gryparis A, et al. Occup Environ Med
2014;71:201--207.

ABSTRACT Objectives Ambient air pollution has been associated with
sudden deaths, some of which are likely due to ventricular arrhythmias.
Deﬁbrillator discharge studies have examined the association of air
pollution with arrhythmias in sensitive populations. No studies have
assessed this association using residence-speciﬁc estimates of air
pollution exposure. Methods In the Normative Aging Study, we
investigated the association between temporally resolved and spatially
resolved black carbon (BC) and PM2.5 and arrhythmia episodes (bigeminy,
trigeminy or couplets episodes) measured as ventricular ectopy (VE) by 4
min ECG monitoring in repeated measures of 701 subjects, during the
years 2000--2010. We used a binomial distribution (having or not a VE
episode) in a mixed effect model with a random intercept for subject,
controlling for seasonality, temperature, day of the week, medication
use, smoking, having diabetes, body mass index and age. We also examined
whether these associations were modiﬁed by genotype or phenotype.
Results We found signiﬁcant increases in VE with both pollutants and
lags; for the estimated concentration averaged over the 3 days prior to
the health assessment, we found increases in the odds of having VE with
an OR of 1.52 (95% CI 1.19 to 1.94) for an IQR (0.30 μg/m3) increase in
BC and an OR of 1.39 (95% CI 1.12 to 1.71) for an IQR (5.63 μg/m3)
increase in PM2.5. We also found higher effects in subjects with the
glutathione S-transferase theta-1 and glutathione S-transferase mu-1
variants and in obese ( p<0.05). Conclusions Increased levels of
short-term trafﬁcrelated pollutants may increase the risk of ventricular
arrhythmia in elderly subjects.

INTRODUCTION Air pollution has been consistently associated with
cardiovascular morbidity, mortality1 and premature death,2 3 but the
underlying mechanisms are not well understood. In relation to more
speciﬁc cardiac events, there is evidence that air pollution may
contribute through a wide range of pathways, and several biological
mechanisms by which air pollution can elicit cardiovascular morbidity
and mortality have been identiﬁed, including oxidative stress (OS),4
autonomic dysfunction5--9 and systemic inﬂammation.10--12

Zanobetti A, et al. Occup Environ Med 2014;71:201--207.
doi:10.1136/oemed-2013-101526

What this paper adds ▸ Deﬁbrillator discharge studies have examined the
association of air pollution with arrhythmias in sensitive populations.
▸ None of these existing studies used exposure estimates that are
speciﬁc to the location of each study participant. ▸ This is the ﬁrst
study to examine the association between arrhythmias and
residence-speciﬁc estimates of air pollution exposure. ▸ We found a
clear association between arrhythmias and increased levels of trafﬁc
related pollutants and these associations are higher compared with
previously published studies. ▸ Moreover, individuals with gene variants
related to oxidative stress may be at higher risk from air pollution.

Several studies have observed associations between air pollution and
cardiac arrhythmias, based on data from implantable
cardioverterdeﬁbrillator (ICDs). These devices, which restore a normal
heart rhythm, allow the continuous monitoring of patients and the
documentation of type and time of ventricular arrhythmias. These studies
have found the associations of air pollution with arrhythmias13--16 in
sensitive populations, although results have been mixed. However, less
is known for the general population. Further, none of these existing
studies have used exposure estimates that are speciﬁc to the location of
each study participant. Ljungman et al17 found that patients with
implantable cardioverter deﬁbrillators also showed evidence of rapid
effects of air pollution on the risk of life-threatening ventricular
arrhythmias. Among cardiovascular health indicators, irregularities in
myocardial repolarisation may be especially important because they can
lead to the development of cardiac arrhythmias. Another study18 examined
the effects of air pollutants on repeated measurements of QT interval
(QTc), an ECG marker of ventricular repolarisation, in 580 men from the
Veterans Affairs (VA) 201

Downloaded from oem.bmj.com on April 5, 2014 - Published by
group.bmj.com

Environment Normative Aging Study (NAS). The authors found an
association between QTc and black carbon (BC) measurements from the
Harvard supersite. Similarly, in a repeated-measures study of patients
with coronary artery disease,19 we found associations between ambient
and indoor BC and a report of being in trafﬁc with risk of increase in
T-Wave Alternans (TWA), a marker of cardiac electrical instability. In
Boston, trafﬁc-related pollutants were also related to the promotion of
ST segment depression among elderly subjects.20 These ﬁndings suggest a
possible biological pathway linking acute effects of air pollution on
increased risk of ventricular repolarisation, cardiovascular arrhythmias
and cardiac death. Short-term exposure studies have mostly used
stationary monitors to estimate exposure; however, speciﬁc components of
trafﬁc-related air pollution vary substantially within cities, and
trafﬁc variables may contribute to this variation.21--23 This suggests
that spatiotemporal prediction of BC levels within the Boston area could
substantially improve exposure assessment. An important tool for
studying within-city variation in air pollution is the development of
geographically based exposure models; however, previous studies have
been limited by the lack of high-resolution daily exposure data. BC is a
trafﬁc-related particle and a common surrogate for trafﬁc particles in
general, weighted towards diesel particles. We have developed a
spatiotemporal land-use regression model for trafﬁc particles based on
BC in the greater Boston metropolitan area.24 Predictions from this
model have been merged to the geocoded address of each subject of the
NAS cohort and have been used to study the effect of trafﬁc pollution
with markers of inﬂammatory and endothelial response,25 blood pressure26
and other outcomes. This model for BC has been now updated and revised
to include data from 125 monitoring stations recording BC levels at some
point between January 1999 and August 2011. Growing evidence also
suggests that trafﬁc-related components of PM pollution contribute
signiﬁcantly to particle-related cardiovascular effects. For example, a
recent chamber study examined the short-term effects of PM2.5 on blood
pressure and found that effects were much stronger for the samples
collected from a high-trafﬁc area.27 We have recently presented a new
method28 of assessing temporally resolved and spatially resolved PM2.5
exposures for epidemiological studies. This approach is an extension of
existing land-use models to include satellite-based physical aerosol
optical depth (AOD) measurements.24 29 We have applied these predictions
to study the association between PM2.5 exposure and hospital admissions
among elderly across New England, as well as with geocoded birth weight
in Massachusetts.30 31 In this study, we hypothesised that increases in
estimated BC concentrations and estimated PM2.5 concentrations may be
associated with increases in ventricular arrhythmias. We therefore
investigated the association between BC and PM2.5 and arrhythmia
episodes measured as ventricular ectopy (VE) among participants of the
VA NAS residing in the greater Boston area. We also examined whether
participant characteristics (obesity, diabetes, statin use, genetic
susceptibility) might modify this association.

METHODS Our study population consisted of a cohort of elderly men
recruited to the NAS, an ongoing longitudinal study of aging established
by the Veterans Administration in 1963 from community-dwelling men from
the greater Boston area aged 21--80 years at the time of entry, who were
free of any known 202

chronic medical conditions and were asked to return for onsite physical
examinations and questionnaires every 3--5 years. Study participants
provided written informed consent, and the study protocol was approved
by the Institutional Review Boards of all participating institutions.32
Eligibility for this study required continued participation as of the
time when heart rate variability measurements began in the year 2000.
Drop out has been less than 1% per year in the cohort and is
predominantly when subjects move out of the study area or mortality. The
study population is a self-selected group of people who continued to
participate in this ongoing study. Since 1963, every 3--5 years,
participants have undergone routine physical examinations, laboratory
tests, collection of medical history information and completion of
questionnaires on smoking history, educational level, food intake and
other factors that may inﬂuence health. Diabetes was deﬁned as either a
physician diagnosis of diabetes, use of any diabetes medication or
fasting glucose >126 mg/dL, and obesity was deﬁned as a body mass index
(BMI) of at least 30. Self-reported data on diabetes status and statin
use were updated at each study visit and conﬁrmed by a physician
interview. In addition, BMI and obesity were updated based on height and
weight measurements at each visit. Thus, these data reﬂect changes in
disease status and medication use over time. Beginning in November 2000,
ECG measurements were also obtained during each participant's regularly
scheduled visit.

ECG measurement and analysis After a 5 min rest, with the subject
seated, the ECG was recorded for 5--10 min with a two-channel (ﬁve lead)
ECG monitor (Trillium 3000; Forest Medical, Inc, East Syracuse, New
York, USA) using a sampling rate of 256 Hz per channel. A detailed
description of the protocol is provided elsewhere.6 33 Brieﬂy, with a
PC-based software, beats were automatically labelled and assigned
tentative annotations, and then an experienced scanner reviewed the
results to correct for any mislabelled beats or artefacts, and the best
4-consecutive-minute intervals were used for the analysis. The normal or
supraventricular beats were recorded; 153 measurements were excluded
because of ECG recordings that have recording time <3.5 min, or
insufﬁcient T-wave amplitude. In this study, we examined arrhythmia
episodes measured as VE. We deﬁned VE as having bigeminy, trigeminy or
couplets episodes. We then created an indicator variable for having (=1)
or not having (=0) episodes. We examined 1448 observations of subjects
who had either one (n=701), two (n=451), three (n=217) or four (n=79)
ECG measurements.

Air pollution and meteorology PM2.5 ( particulate air matter with
aerodynamic diameter less than 2.5 mm) and BC concentrations were
continuously measured at the stationary ambient monitoring site at the
Harvard University Countway Library, which is located <1 km from the
clinical laboratory where subjects were examined. Hourly outdoor BC
concentrations were also obtained from two sites operated by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. We obtained
measurements from speciﬁc monitoring campaigns from two sources:
beginning in 1999, hourly outdoor and indoor BC concentrations were
measured inside and outside of 30 residential homes using aethalometers
over 48 h intervals as part of a NIEHS funded study of air pollution and

Zanobetti A, et al. Occup Environ Med 2014;71:201--207.
doi:10.1136/oemed-2013-101526

Downloaded from oem.bmj.com on April 5, 2014 - Published by
group.bmj.com

Environment heart rate variability (APAHRV) conducted at the Harvard
School of Public Health. Secondly, outdoor 24 h averages of elemental
carbon (EC) concentration were obtained from an Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) funded multipollutant exposures study of sensitive
individuals during winter and summer of 2000 for 7-day periods in 23
locations. A third source was rotating monitoring sites located at the
homes of 50 people, sampling for 1 month each in the hot and cold
seasons, with addresses chosen to ﬁll in locations undersampled or not
sampled in the previous monitoring campaigns. Finally, reﬂectance data
were obtained from PM2.5 ﬁlters from six monitors located geographically
around the Boston area (one in the city, one slightly north of the city,
two north and west of the city, and two south and east of the city).
These data were obtained daily. Hourly meteorological measurements, such
as mean temperature (°F) and dew point temperature (°C), were obtained
from the National Weather Service First Order Station at Logan Airport
in East Boston.

BC exposure prediction We estimated BC exposures using a validated
spatiotemporal land-use regression model that provides daily estimates
of BC concentrations throughout the greater Boston, Massachusetts, area;
details of this model have been published previously.24 We used an
updated and revised version of the aforementioned model, with data from
125 monitoring stations that collected data during the period of January
1999 to August 2011, with a total of 14 238 daily averages from 125
monitoring stations. We used measurements from continuous ambient
monitors as well as speciﬁc monitoring campaigns as described above.
Brieﬂy, daily average BC estimates from 125 monitoring sites were used
to develop a BC prediction model, where the majority of sites measured
BC continuously using aethalometers and other sites collected particles
on a ﬁlter over 24 h and measured EC using reﬂectance analysis.
Predictors in the ﬁnal model included measures of land use for each
address (cumulative trafﬁc density within 100 m, land cover within 1 km
radius and distance to coast), geographic information system location
(latitude, longitude), daily meteorological factors (apparent
temperature, wind speed and height of the planetary boundary layer) and
other characteristics (day of week, day of season), as well as
interaction terms of land-use measures and daily meteorological factors
(eg, interaction between the height of the planetary boundary layer and
an indicator of the values above the median value of land cover within 1
km radius). The Boston central site monitor was also included as a
predictor to reﬂect average pollutant concentrations over the entire
region on each day. Predicted daily concentrations showed a >3-fold
range of variation in exposure across measurement sites (adjusted
R2=0.83). Out-of-sample cross-validation at 32 monitoring sites showed
an average correlation of 0.73 between predicted and observed daily BC
levels. As opposed to evaluating the predictive ability of the model for
all monitors, which included both residential and urban, non-residential
locations, we selected as our test set a subset of monitors that were
sited in residential locations. This validation approach provides a
better estimate of the predictive performance of the exposure model at
study subject residences as opposed to a more general metric that
encompasses locations in which no subjects are located. This predictive
performance of the model at any given held out (out-of-sample) location
is being compared with the predictive performance when one uses the
central site monitor as the value for that given location. The direct
comparison of the

correlations between the predictions from these two exposure measures
and the actual monitored value at any location is directly comparable
since the central site reading is effectively an out-of-sample
prediction because the data from that monitor are not being used when
one uses the central site reading as a surrogate. We used the 24 h
average estimates of BC exposure at the geocoded residence of each
participant as a surrogate for individual exposure to trafﬁc-related air
pollution and average these predicted values to obtain 2-day, 3-day and
4-day moving averages of exposure.

PM2.5 exposure prediction We generated daily predictions of PM2.5
concentration levels across New England for 2000--2008 at a 10×10 km
spatial resolution using satellite-derived AOD measurements. Full
details of the modelling framework have been previously published.28 30
In brief, we used day-speciﬁc calibrations of AOD data using ground
PM2.5 measurements from 78 monitoring sites in the EPA and Interagency
Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments monitoring network. The
model included also land-use regression and meteorological variables
(temperature, wind speed, visibility, elevation, distance to major
roads, percent of open space, point emissions and area emissions). To
estimate PM2.5 concentrations in each grid cell on each day, we started
by calibrating the AOD-PM2.5 relationship for each day using grid cells
with both monitors and AOD values using mixed models with random slopes
for day and nested regions. The ﬁrst-stage calibrations resulted in high
out-of-sample R2 (mean out-of-sample R2=0.85). We then used a second
model to address days when AOD measures are not available (due to cloud
coverage, snow, etc.), ﬁtting a model with a smooth function of latitude
and longitude and a random intercept for each cell that takes advantage
of the association of grid cells AOD values with PM2.5 monitoring
located elsewhere, and the association with available AOD values in
neighbouring grid cells, which provided a mean out-of-sample R2=0.81.
PM2.5 exposure data were generated by our prediction models at a 10×10
km spatial resolution. These data were matched with the NAS subject's
addresses using ArcGIS and SAS based on spatial location and date. For
both BC and PM2.5, we computed averages of two, three and four previous
days as our exposure metrics.

Genotyping Participants' blood was collected at each visit. Multiplex
PCR assays were designed using the Sequenom Spectro DESIGNER software.
Assays were genotyped using the Sequenom MassArray matrix-assisted laser
desorption-ionization time-ofﬂight mass spectrometer with semiautomated
primer design and implementation of the very short extension method.
Assays that failed to multiplex were genotyped using the TaqMan 50
exonuclease (ABI PRISM V.7900 Sequence Detector). To reduce multiple
comparisons by investigations of multiple gene deletions and
polymorphisms, and based on previous literature, we selected only two
gene deletions (glutathione S-transferase mu-1 (GSTM1) and glutathione
S-transferase theta-1 (GSTT1)) that were related to the genetic
susceptibility of a participant to OS. The gene deletions were
categorised as 1=no deletion and 0=deletion.

Statistical analyses We used mixed effects models to examine the
associations between ambient pollution and VE. The VE episodes were
dichotomised as present or absent, and we therefore applied

Zanobetti A, et al. Occup Environ Med 2014;71:201--207.
doi:10.1136/oemed-2013-101526

203

Downloaded from oem.bmj.com on April 5, 2014 - Published by
group.bmj.com

Environment mixed logistic regression models to account for correlation
among measurements on the same subject across different medical visits.
This is a standard approach for analysing longitudinal data with
repeated measures on the same subject.34 We adjusted for a priori chosen
known or plausible confounders, including speciﬁc personal and temporal
characteristics. We included in all models random subject-speciﬁc
intercepts and ﬁxed effects for BMI (as a continuous variable), age,
cumulative cigarette smoking in pack-years, use of medication such as
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, β-blockers, calcium blockers,
statins and having diabetes (yes/no), and an indicator variable for
alcohol consumption deﬁned as two or more drinks per day. We adjusted
for socioeconomic status at the individual level with average income and
years of education (deﬁned as less than 12 years, 12--16 years, over 16
years), and at the neighbourhood level with poverty level for each
address as measured by per cent below poverty level of each census block
group in the 1999 census, and per cent of population over 25 years of
age without a high school diploma as measured by the 1999 census. We
also adjusted for the 24 h means of temperature for seasonality using
sine and cosine terms and a linear variable for year to capture
long-term changes in both outcome and exposure. Healthier men are more
likely to come back to subsequent visits; therefore, we used inverse
probability weighting (IPW) to correct for a potential survival bias.35
The probability at ﬁrst visit was 1; we then calculated the probability
of having a second, third of subsequent visit using logistic regressions
given all relevant factors at the previous visit: age, BMI, smoking
status and pack-years, hypertension, cholesterol and diabetes. We then
used the inverse of the predicted probabilities as the weights in the
models. In the models used to examine effect modiﬁcation, we included an
interaction term that allowed associations between the pollutants and
the outcomes to vary among subgroups. Diabetes, obesity and statin use
were treated as time-varying covariates, where the status was updated at
each visit to reﬂect changes since the last visit. We also examined
effect modiﬁcation by gene variants GSTM1 and GSTT1. Interaction terms
were added to the model one at a time. Air pollution was examined for
the previous 24 h, and for the moving averages of two, three and four
previous days. As sensitivity analysis we included in the model ozone
that activates C-ﬁbres and could thereby inﬂuence ventricular rhythm; we
also examined whether the results changed without using the IPW. The
results are reported as ORs per an IQR increase in the pollutants. The
analyses were performed with statistical software R V.2.15.1.

RESULTS In table 1, we present characteristics of the patients, health
and environmental variables among the NAS population during 2000--2010.
The age range of the study subjects was 57--100 years, and 189 (26.9%)
of them were obese, as deﬁned by a BMI ≥30 at the ﬁrst visit. In total,
701 subjects had one clinic visit, 451 had two visits, 217 had three
visits and 79 had four visits, with a total of 1448 observations. Table
2 shows the results of the association between VE and air pollution. We
found increases in the odds of having ventricular ectopic beats, with an
OR of 1.32 (95% CI 1.06 to 1.65) for an IQR (0.39 μg/m3) increase in the
same day of BC. The OR associated 204

Table 1 Characteristics of the VA Normative Aging Study subjects at
baseline and across all visits and distributions of the weather and
outcome variables Baseline

All visits

Variable

N

Mean

SD

N

Mean

SD

Ventricular episodes (VE) Age (years) BMI (kg/m2) Pack-years of
cigarettes smoked Temperature (°F) BC same day (μg/m3) BC 2-day average
(μg/m3) BC 3-day average (μg/m3) PM2.5 same day (μg/m3) PM2.5 2-day
average (μg/m3) PM2.5 3-day average (μg/m3)

701 701 701 701 696 596 593 592 616 618 618 N 69 289 259 227 122 135 189
130 303 483

4.98 73.33 28.23 21.76 53.47 0.62 0.59 0.54 12.34 12.20 11.88 (%) 9.84
41.23 36.95 32.38 17.4 19.3 26.96 18.5 46.76 80.23

17.93 6.70 4.05 25.91 16.13 0.36 0.33 0.29 7.00 6.22 5.43

1448 1448 1448 1448 1443 1190 1187 1186 1247 1251 1252 N 177 737 583 525
312 305 390 262 649 1027

6.77 75.31 28.14 20.53 53.32 0.56 0.53 0.48 11.18 11.09 10.83 (%) 12.22
50.9 40.26 36.26 21.55 21.3 26.93 18.1 47.58 79.8

22.19 6.77 4.24 24.64 16.29 0.33 0.30 0.27 6.51 5.68 4.99

VE 0/1 Statin user β-blocker ACE Ca Diabetes Obese (BMI≥30) Take two or
more drinks a day GSTM1 (no deletion) GSTT1 (no deletion)

BC, black carbon; BMI, body mass index; GSTT1, glutathione S-transferase
theta-1; GSTM1, glutathione S-transferase mu-1; VA, Veterans Affairs.

with an IQR (0.30 μg/m3) increase in the 3-day average of BC was 1.52
(95% CI 1.19 to 1.94). The association between having ventricular
ectopic beats and estimated PM2.5 was positive and signiﬁcant. We found
increases in the odds of having ventricular ectopic beats with an OR of
1.26 (95% CI 1.05 to 1.52) for an IQR (6.89 μg/m3) increase in the same
day of PM2.5, and an OR of 1.39 (95% CI 1.12 to 1.71) for an IQR (5.63
μg/m3) increase in the 3-day average of PM2.5. We then examined effect
modiﬁcation by obesity, statin use, having diabetes and gene variants
(ﬁgure 1). We did not ﬁnd any evidence of modiﬁcation by personal
characteristics and BC, but we found signiﬁcantly higher effects in
obese in the

Table 2 ORs and 95% CI of the association between ventricular arrhythmia
episodes and air pollution VE BC Same day 2-day average 3-day average
PM2.5 Same day 2-day average 4-day average

%

95% CI

IQR

1.32 1.47 1.52

1.06 1.16 1.19

1.65 1.87 1.94

0.39 0.35 0.30

1.26 1.26 1.39

1.05 1.02 1.12

1.52 1.54 1.71

6.89 6.21 5.63

BC, black carbon; VE, ventricular ectopy.

Zanobetti A, et al. Occup Environ Med 2014;71:201--207.
doi:10.1136/oemed-2013-101526

Downloaded from oem.bmj.com on April 5, 2014 - Published by
group.bmj.com

Environment Figure 1 OR and 95% CI per an IQR increase in each
pollutant. Effect modiﬁcation by statin, diabetes, obesity and
glutathione S-transferase mu-1 and glutathione S-transferase theta-1
genes. The symbol * indicates a signiﬁcant interaction.

association between estimated PM2.5 and having ventricular ectopic beats
with an OR of 1.17 (95% CI 0.95 to 1.43) in nonobese and an OR of 1.80
(95% CI 1.24 to 2.63) in obese for an IQR (6.89 μg/m3) increase in the
same day of PM2.5. Subjects having the deletion of GSTM1 and for
subjects without the deletion of GSTT1 had also signiﬁcantly higher
effects (ﬁgure 1). When we included ozone in the model, this was not
signiﬁcant; when included with each of the other pollutants, ozone was
not signiﬁcant and did not change the effects of PM2.5 or BC. The
results without adjusting for the IPW are consistent but less strong.

DISCUSSION We found a signiﬁcant association between having ventricular
arrhythmias and both BC concentrations estimated at each participant's
home, and temporally resolved and spatially resolved PM2.5
concentrations, in a cohort of elderly men. Our interactions with
obesity (only for BC), statin and diabetes were not signiﬁcant,
indicating no effect modiﬁcation by these individual characteristics,
while we found that GSTM1 and GSTT1 signiﬁcantly modify the association.
This study, therefore, provides evidence that the trafﬁc-related
pollution markers are associated with ventricular arrhythmias. Our
results further suggest that individuals with gene variants related to
OS may be at higher risk from air pollution. Our ﬁndings are consistent
with previous studies based on data from ICDs, which have found the
associations of air pollution with arrhythmias13--17 in sensitive
populations. In this study in which we examined a more general
population and focused on a more accurate exposure deﬁned by estimates
of spatially resolved BC and PM2.5, we found a stronger association with
ventricular arrhythmias compared with the previously published studies.
Consistent with these ﬁndings, ambient trafﬁc-related pollutants'
concentrations have been associated in several Boston area studies of
intermediate cardiovascular indicators, including heart rate
variability,5 7 8 ST-segment depression,20 36 QTc, an ECG marker of
ventricular repolarisation18 and TWA.19 BC is a trafﬁc-related particle
and a common surrogate for trafﬁc particles in general, weighted towards
diesel particles. We have developed a spatiotemporal land-use regression
model for trafﬁc particles based on BC in the greater Boston
metropolitan area.24 In the same NAS cohort of elderly men and using the

same BC predictions at each home address, we have previously reported
associations with several outcomes: markers of inﬂammatory and
endothelial response25 and blood pressure.26 Our observed associations
can be explained by plausible pathophysiological mechanisms. Toxicity of
trafﬁc particles may have a direct effect on the blood, cardiovascular
system and lung receptors.37 38 Deposition in the airways and lung
alveoli may trigger proinﬂammatory signalling via a reactive oxygen
species (ROS)-dependent mechanism.39 40 For example, Ghelﬁ et al41 have
shown that blocking the TRPV1 receptor in the lung prevents
particle-induced disturbances in cardiac rhythm. Diesel particles have
also been shown to increase OS in endothelial tissue,42 43 inducing the
production of heme oxygenase-1, a rapid response part of the body's
defence system against OS. The viability of cell cultures of
microvascular endothelial cells was impaired by diesel particles with an
accompanying large increase in induction of heme oxygenase-1.43
Moreover, trafﬁc particles may also cross the pulmonary epithelium and
may be able to reach the heart via the vasculature,44 45 where they may
induce OS and proinﬂammatory changes in the vasculature and myocardial
substrate.38 The generated proinﬂammatory cytokines and ROS may
subsequently affect a variety of health measures, including autonomic
cardiac control.38 We did not ﬁnd effect modiﬁcation by obesity,
diabetes or statin use for BC and only by obesity for PM2.5; this is
contrary of what has been previously found for other endpoints.6 7
Genetic polymorphisms of the GSTs are common, the GSTM1 gene is deleted
in approximately half of the white population (the polymorphic ‘null'
genotype) and lack of the GSTM1 protein has been shown to modify the
response to air pollutants; for example, GST deﬁciency was associated
with signiﬁcant HRV alterations in the general population.46 In the NAS
cohort, GSTM1 deletion has been associated with the high-frequency
component of heart rate variability,9 and larger effects of BC on
soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule were seen in subjects who were
GSTM1 null.10 Baja and coauthors found a stronger association between
QTc and BC among participants who had higher OS gene scores. Therefore,
this is in agreement with our results of a higher risk of having
ventricular episodes due to BC in subject GSTM1-null. Ren et al47 found
that the GSTT1 modiﬁed effects of BC on total plasma homocysteine, with
a higher effect in subjects with the deletion, and no effect modiﬁcation
by GSTM1. A case--control study looking at the relationship between
occupational exposure to

Zanobetti A, et al. Occup Environ Med 2014;71:201--207.
doi:10.1136/oemed-2013-101526

205

Downloaded from oem.bmj.com on April 5, 2014 - Published by
group.bmj.com

Environment vehicular exhaust and OS in trafﬁc police found a signiﬁcant
increase in urinary 8- hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) levels in null
GSTM1 ( p<0.01) genotypes, but the genotype frequencies GSTT1 genes did
not vary in both exposed and control groups.48 Similar results were
found by Ren et al49 in the NAS population. On the other hand, survival
of patients with malignant glioma was reduced in subjects with the GSTM1
deletion, but longer in subjects without the GSTT1 deletion.50 GSTs are
the most important family of phase II isoenzymes known to detoxify a
variety of electrophilic compounds, including carcinogens, and
environmental toxins. Individuals with the deletion of GSTM1 or GSTT1
have been shown to reduce GST activity and thus may be unable to
eliminate toxins as efﬁciently when they are exposed to oxidative
pollutants.50 A recent review and meta-analysis also found that null
genotypes of GSTM1/GSTT1 were associated with increased risk of
diabetes.51 Differential ﬁndings among studies of effect modiﬁcation by
GSTM1 and GSTT1 variation might be attributable to several issues such
as differences in exposure, outcome and population, measurement errors
in exposure or phenotype, or chance. Further research is needed in order
to understand the biological mechanisms. One limitation of this study is
that these results cannot be generalised to other populations without
further research as our study population consisted entirely of elderly
men, 97% of whom were Caucasian. Additionally, the study population is a
selfselected group of people who continued to participate in an ongoing
study for many years and may not be representative of all elderly men in
the USA. In particular, there may be survivor bias if the subjects who
continue to participate are healthier than other older people, which
would bias effect estimates towards the null, so the true effect in the
general population may be stronger. Another limitation is that we do not
have the exposure during travel as that would have required personal
monitoring, which was not available for a large cohort with measurements
over a decade. In conclusion, these results add support for the
hypothesis that trafﬁc-related pollution alters autonomic control in a
manner conducive to increased arrhythmia and that OS plays a role in
this process. Contributors AZparticipated in the conception and design,
analysed and interpreted the data, drafted the article and approved the
ﬁnal version. BAC, DS, PSV, ROW, DRG and JS participated in the
conception and design, revised the paper critically for important
intellectual content and approved the ﬁnal version. AG analysed and
interpreted the pollution data, revised the paper and approved the ﬁnal
version. IK analysed and interpreted the pollution data creating the
prediction models for PM2.5, revised the paper and approved the ﬁnal
version.

2

3 4

5 6

7 8

9

10 11 12

13

14

15

16

17 18

19 20 21

22

Funding This work was supported by the National Institute of Aging R21
AG040027-01 and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
P01 ES009825, ES-00002, by US Environmental Protection Agency
RD-83241601 and RD 83479801 and by a VA Research Career Scientist award
to DS. The Veterans Administration's Normative Aging Study is supported
by the Cooperative Studies Program/Epidemiology Research and Information
Centers of the US Department of Veterans Affairs and is a component of
the Massachusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and Information Center,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. This publication was made possible by USEPA
grant RD-83241601 and RD 83479801. Its contents are solely the
responsibility of the grantee and do not necessarily represent the
ofﬁcial views of the USEPA. Further, USEPA does not endorse the purchase
of any commercial products or services mentioned in the publication

23

Competing interests None.

27

24

25

26

Ethics approval IRB at Harvard School of Public Health. Provenance and
peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

28

REFERENCES

29

1

206

Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA III, et al. Particulate matter air
pollution and cardiovascular disease: an update to the scientiﬁc
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation
2010;121:2331--78.

30

Pope CA III, Burnett RT, Thurston GD, et al. Cardiovascular mortality
and long-term exposure to particulate air pollution: epidemiological
evidence of general pathophysiological pathways of disease. Circulation
2004;109: 71--7. Schwartz J. Air pollution and daily mortality: a review
and meta analysis. Environ Res 1994;64:36--52. Chuang KJ, Chan CC, Su
TC, et al. The effect of urban air pollution on inﬂammation, oxidative
stress, coagulation, and autonomic dysfunction in young adults. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2007;176:370--6. Gold DR, Litonjua A, Schwartz J,
et al. Ambient pollution and heart rate variability. Circulation
2000;101:1267--73. Park SK, O'Neill MS, Vokonas PS, et al. Effects of
air pollution on heart rate variability: the VA normative aging study.
Environ Health Perspect 2005;113: 304--9. Schwartz J, Litonjua A, Suh H,
et al. Trafﬁc related pollution and heart rate variability in a panel of
elderly subjects. Thorax 2005;60:455--61. Zanobetti A, Gold DR, Stone
PH, et al. Reduction in heart rate variability with trafﬁc and air
pollution in patients with coronary artery disease. Environ Health
Perspect 2009;118:324--30. Schwartz J, Park SK, O'Neill MS, et al.
Glutathione-S-transferase M1, obesity, statins, and autonomic effects of
particles: gene-by-drug-by-environment interaction. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2005;172:1529--33. Madrigano J, Baccarelli A, Wright RO, et al.
Air pollution, obesity, genes and cellular adhesion molecules. Occup
Environ Med 2010;67:312--17. Peters A, Dockery DW, Muller JE, et al.
Increased particulate air pollution and the triggering of myocardial
infarction. Circulation 2001;103:2810--15. Ruckerl R, Ibald-Mulli A,
Koenig W, et al. Air pollution and markers of inﬂammation and
coagulation in patients with coronary heart disease. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2006;173:432--41. Dockery DW, Luttmann-Gibson H, Rich DQ, et
al. Association of air pollution with increased incidence of ventricular
tachyarrhythmias recorded by implanted cardioverter deﬁbrillators.
Environ Health Perspect 2005;113:670--4. Rich DQ, Schwartz J, Mittleman
MA, et al. Association of short-term ambient air pollution
concentrations and ventricular arrhythmias. Am J Epidemiol
2005;161:1123--32. Rich DQ, Kim MH, Turner JR, et al. Association of
ventricular arrhythmias detected by implantable cardioverter
deﬁbrillator and ambient air pollutants in the St Louis, Missouri
metropolitan area. Occup Environ Med 2006;63:591--6. Rich DQ, Mittleman
MA, Link MS, et al. Increased risk of paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillation
episodes associated with acute increases in ambient air pollution.
Environ Health Perspect 2006;114:120--3. Ljungman PL, Berglind N,
Holmgren C, et al. Rapid effects of air pollution on ventricular
arrhythmias. Eur Heart J 2008;29:2894--901. Baja ES, Schwartz JD,
Wellenius GA, et al. Trafﬁc-related air pollution and QT interval:
modiﬁcation by diabetes, obesity, and oxidative stress gene
polymorphisms in the normative aging study. Environ Health Perspect
2010;118:840--6. Zanobetti A, Stone PH, Speizer FE, et al. T-wave
alternans, air pollution and trafﬁc in high-risk subjects. Am J Cardiol
2009;104:665--70. Gold DR, Litonjua AA, Zanobetti A, et al. Air
pollution and ST-segment depression in elderly subjects. Environ Health
Perspect 2005;113:883--7. Brauer M, Hoek G, Van Vliet P, et al.
Estimating long-term average particulate air pollution concentrations:
application of trafﬁc indicators and geographic information systems.
Epidemiology 2003;14:228--39. Clougherty JE, Wright RJ, Baxter LK, et
al. Land use regression modeling of intra-urban residential variability
in multiple trafﬁc-related air pollutants. Environ Health 2008;7:17.
Kinney PL, Aggarwal M, Northridge ME, et al. Airborne concentrations of
PM(2.5) and diesel exhaust particles on Harlem sidewalks: a
community-based pilot study. Environ Health Perspect 2000;108:213--18.
Gryparis A, Coull BA, Schwartz J, et al. Semiparametric latent variable
regression models for spatiotemporal modelling of mobile source
particles in the greater Boston area. J Royal Stat Soc C Appl Stat
2007;56:183--209. Alexeeff SE, Coull BA, Gryparis A, et al. Medium-term
exposure to trafﬁc-related air pollution and markers of inﬂammation and
endothelial function. Environ Health Perspect 2011;119:481--6. Schwartz
J, Alexeeff SE, Mordukhovich I, et al. Association between long-term
exposure to trafﬁc particles and blood pressure in the Veterans
Administration Normative Aging Study. Occup Environ Med 2012;69:422--7.
Brook RD, Urch B, Dvonch JT, et al. Insights into the mechanisms and
mediators of the effects of air pollution exposure on blood pressure and
vascular function in healthy humans. Hypertension 2009;54:659--67. Kloog
I, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, et al. Assessing temporally and spatially
resolved PM2.5 exposures for epidemiological studies using satellite
aerosol optical depth measurements. Atmos Environ 2011;45:6267--75.
Paciorek CJ, Yanosky JD, Puett RC, et al. Practical large-scale
spatio-temporal modeling of particulate matter concentrations. Ann Appl
Stat 2009;3:370--97. Kloog I, Coull BA, Zanobetti A, et al. Acute and
chronic effects of particles on hospital admissions in New-England. PloS
ONE 2012;7:e34664.

Zanobetti A, et al. Occup Environ Med 2014;71:201--207.
doi:10.1136/oemed-2013-101526

Downloaded from oem.bmj.com on April 5, 2014 - Published by
group.bmj.com

Environment 31

32 33

34 35

36

37 38 39 40

41

42

Kloog I, Melly SJ, Ridgway WL, et al. Using new satellite based exposure
methods to study the association between pregnancy pm2.5 exposure,
premature birth and birth weight in Massachusetts. Environ Health
2012;11:40. Bell B, Rose C, Damon A. The Normative Aging Study: an
interdisciplinary and longitudinal study of health and aging. Aging Hum
Dev 1972;3:5--17. Park SK, O'Neill MS, Vokonas PS, et al. Air pollution
and heart rate variability: effect modiﬁcation by chronic lead exposure.
Epidemiology 2008;19: 111--20. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware JH.
Applied longitudinal analysis. Wiley, 2004. Hernán MA, Lanoy E,
Costagliola D, et al. Comparison of dynamic treatment regimes via
inverse probability weighting. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol
2006;98:237--42. Chuang KJ, Coull BA, Zanobetti A, et al. Particulate
air pollution as a risk factor for ST-segment depression in patients
with coronary artery disease. Circulation 2008;118:1307--8. Brook RD,
Brook JR, Rajagopalan S. Air pollution: the “Heart” of the problem. Curr
Hypertens Rep 2003;5:32--9. Simkhovich BZ, Kleinman MT, Kloner RA. Air
pollution and cardiovascular injury epidemiology, toxicology, and
mechanisms. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;52:719--26. Ghio AJ, Devlin RB.
Inﬂammatory lung injury after bronchial instillation of air pollution
particles. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;164:704--8. Ghio AJ, Kim C,
Devlin RB. Concentrated ambient air particles induce mild pulmonary
inﬂammation in healthy human volunteers. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2000;162:981--8. Ghelﬁ E, Rhoden CR, Wellenius GA, et al. Cardiac
oxidative stress and electrophysiological changes in rats exposed to
concentrated ambient particles are mediated by TRP-dependent pulmonary
reﬂexes. Toxicol Sci 2008;102:328--36. Furuyama A, Hirano S, Koike E, et
al. Induction of oxidative stress and inhibition of plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 production in endothelial cells following exposure

43

44 45

46

47

48

49

50

51

Zanobetti A, et al. Occup Environ Med 2014;71:201--207.
doi:10.1136/oemed-2013-101526

to organic extracts of diesel exhaust particles and urban ﬁne particles.
Arch Toxicol 2006;80:154--62. Hirano S, Furuyama A, Koike E, et al.
Oxidative-stress potency of organic extracts of diesel exhaust and urban
ﬁne particles in rat heart microvessel endothelial cells. Toxicology
2003;187:161--70. Nemmar A, Hoet PH, Vanquickenborne B, et al. Passage
of inhaled particles into the blood circulation in humans. Circulation
2002;105:411--14. Nemmar A, Vanbilloen H, Hoylaerts MF, et al. Passage
of intratracheally instilled ultraﬁne particles from the lung into the
systemic circulation in hamster. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2001;164:1665--8. Probst-Hensch NM, Imboden M, Felber Dietrich D, et al.
Glutathione S-transferase polymorphisms, passive smoking, obesity, and
heart rate variability in nonsmokers. Environ Health Perspect
2008;116:1494--9. Ren C, Park SK, Vokonas PS, et al. Air pollution and
homocysteine: more evidence that oxidative stress-related genes modify
effects of particulate air pollution. Epidemiology 2010;21:198--206.
Prasad SB, Vidyullatha P, Vani GT, et al. Association of gene
polymorphism in detoxiﬁcation enzymes and urinary 8-OHdG levels in
trafﬁc policemen exposed to vehicular exhaust. Inhal Toxicol
2013;25:1--8. Ren C, Fang S, Wright RO, et al. Urinary 8-hydroxy-20
-deoxyguanosine as a biomarker of oxidative DNA damage induced by
ambient pollution in the Normative Aging Study. Occup Environ Med.
Published Online First: 2010. http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Citation&list\_
uids=20980452 Silva MM, Da Fonseca CO, Moura-Neto R, et al. Inﬂuence of
GSTM1 and GSTT1 polymorphisms on the survival rate of patients with
malignant glioma under perillyl alcohol-based therapy. Genet Mol Res
2013;12:1621--30. Zhang J, Liu H, Yan H, et al. Null genotypes of GSTM1
and GSTT1 contribute to increased risk of diabetes mellitus: a
meta-analysis. Gene 2013;518:405--11.

207

Downloaded from oem.bmj.com on April 5, 2014 - Published by
group.bmj.com

Associations between arrhythmia episodes and temporally and spatially
resolved black carbon and particulate matter in elderly patients
Antonella Zanobetti, Brent A Coull, Alexandros Gryparis, et al. Occup
Environ Med 2014 71: 201-207 originally published online October 18,
2013

doi: 10.1136/oemed-2013-101526

Updated information and services can be found at:
http://oem.bmj.com/content/71/3/201.full.html

These include:

References

This article cites 49 articles, 13 of which can be accessed free at:
http://oem.bmj.com/content/71/3/201.full.html#ref-list-1

Email alerting service

Topic Collections

Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up
in the box at the top right corner of the online article.

Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections Air
pollution, air quality (160 articles) Other exposures (695 articles)

Notes

To request permissions go to:
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions

To order reprints go to: http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform

To subscribe to BMJ go to: http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/


