ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Cardiac Autonomic Dysfunction: Particulate Air Pollution Effects Are
Modulated by Epigenetic Immunoregulation of Toll-like Receptor 2 and
Dietary Flavonoid Intake Jia Zhong, MS; Elena Colicino, PhD; Xinyi Lin,
PhD; Amar Mehta, PhD; Itai Kloog, PhD; Antonella Zanobetti, PhD;
Hyang-Min Byun, PhD; Marie-Abele Bind, DSc; Laura Cantone, PhD; Diddier
Prada, MD, PhD; Letizia Tarantini, PhD; Letizia Trevisi, PhD; David
Sparrow, DSc; Pantel Vokonas, MD; Joel Schwartz, PhD; Andrea A.
Baccarelli, MD, PhD, FAHA

Background----Short-term ﬁne particles (PM2.5) exposure is associated
with reduced heart rate variability, a strong predictor of cardiac
mortality among older people. Identifying modiﬁable factors that confer
susceptibility is essential for intervention. We evaluated whether
Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) methylation, a reversible immune-epigenetic
process, and its dietary modulation by ﬂavonoids and methyl nutrients,
modify susceptibility to heart rate variability effects following PM2.5
exposure. Methods and Results----We measured heart rate variability and
PM2.5 repeatedly over 11 years (1275 total observations) among 573
elderly men from the Normative Aging Study. Blood TLR2 methylation was
analyzed using pyrosequencing. Daily ﬂavonoid and methyl nutrients
intakes were assessed through the Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ).
Every 10 lg/m3 increase in 48-hour PM2.5 moving average was associated
with 7.74% (95% CI: 1.21% to 15.90%; P=0.09), 7.46% (95% CI: 0.99% to
13.50%; P=0.02), 14.18% (95% CI: 1.14% to 25.49%; P=0.03), and 12.94%
(95% CI: 2.36% to 25.96%; P=0.09) reductions in root mean square of
successive differences, standard deviation of normal-to-normal
intervals, low-frequency power, and high-frequency power, respectively.
Higher TLR2 methylation exacerbated the root mean square of successive
differences, standard deviation of normalto-normal intervals,
low-frequency, and high-frequency reductions associated with heightened
PM2.5 (Pinteraction=0.006, 0.03, 0.05, 0.04, respectively). Every
interquartile-range increase in ﬂavonoid intake was associated with
5.09% reduction in mean TLR2 methylation (95% CI: 0.12% to 10.06%;
P=0.05) and counteracted the effects of PM2.5 on low frequency
(Pinteraction=0.05). No signiﬁcant effect of methyl nutrients on TLR2
methylation was observed. Conclusions----Higher TLR2 methylation may
confer susceptibility to adverse cardiac autonomic effects of PM2.5
exposure in older individuals. Higher ﬂavonoid intake may attenuate
these effects, possibly by decreasing TLR2 methylation. ( J Am Heart
Assoc. 2015;4:e001423 doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423) Key Words:
epidemiology • epigenetics • heart rate variability • inﬂammation •
nutrition

From the Departments of Environmental Health (J.Z., E.C., A.M., A.Z.,
H.-M.B., M.A.B., D.P., L. Trevisi, J.S., A.A.B.) and Biostatistics
(X.L., M.-A.B.,), Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA; Singapore
Institute for Clinical Sciences, Singapore (X.L.); Department of
Geography and Environmental Development, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel (I.K.); Center of Molecular and Genetic
Epidemiology, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy (L.C., L. Tarantini); VA Normative
Aging Study, Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System and the
Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
(D.S., P.V.). This article was handled independently by Hossein
Ardehali, MD, PhD, as a Guest Editor. The editors had no role in the
evaluation of the manuscript or in the decision about its acceptance.
Correspondence to: Andrea A. Baccarelli, MD, PhD, Department of
Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Bldg 1, Rm 1304,
665 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115. E-mail: abaccare@hsph.harvard.edu
Received October 19, 2014; accepted December 31, 2014. ª 2015 The
Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by
Wiley Blackwell. This is an open access article under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work
is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

P

articulate matter (PM) exposure contributes to an estimated 3.7 million
annual deaths worldwide.1 According to the American Heart Association,
PM exposure is a modiﬁable primary contributor to cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality, often resulting from acute cardiovascular
effects after short-term exposure peaks.2 The major sources of
short-term ﬁne particles (PM2.5) pollution are combustion activities
(motor vehicles, power generation, and industrial processes), biomass
burning, and other human activities such as heating and cooking.2
Because prevention of exposure to PM is particularly challenging---more
than 80% of people in the United States receive some exposure---it is
essential to identify modiﬁable factors that contribute to individual
susceptibility to cardiac effects to aid the development of effective
interventions. Short-term PM exposure has been associated with reduced
heart rate variability (HRV) through epidemiological studies.3,4
Impaired autonomic modulation of the rhythmic activity of the Journal of
the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

1

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

ated PM-induced cardiovascular responses, as reﬂected in steeper
reductions in HRV following short-term PM2.5 exposure. We utilized the
Normative Aging Study, a cohort of aging men in Eastern Massachusetts,
to investigate the relationship between short-term PM2.5 (48 hours)
exposure and HRV, and to examine whether TLR2 methylation in blood
leukocytes modiﬁes this relationship. We also examined the effect of
ﬂavonoid and methyl nutrients (folic acid, vitamin B12, and methionine)
intakes on TLR2 methylation and explored their role as modiﬁers of the
short-term effects of ambient PM2.5 exposure on HRV. In addition to our
primary hypothesis, we examined the effect of black carbon, carbon
monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and ozone on HRV, as well as the
relationship between TLR2 methylation and plasma inﬂammatory markers
including interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-8, IL-1b, tumor necrosis factor a
(TNF-a), TNF-c, C-reactive protein, intercellular adhesion molecule 1,
and vascular endothelial growth factor.

Methods Study Population The Normative Aging Study is an ongoing
prospective cohort of older male participants established in Eastern
Massachusetts by the U.S. Veterans Administration.20 For the present
study, we excluded participants with incomplete data on PM2.5 exposure
and HRV, leaving a total of 573 participants who were community-dwelling
men free of heart arrhythmias at examination (Figure 1). Participants
were recalled for visits every 3 to 5 years, and we considered visits
conducted since November 2000 (ie, the earliest date for which PM2.5
data were available) through 2011, for a total of 1275 visits (1 visit
to 4 visits per participant; average 2.2 visits). Among the 573
participants, 500 participants had methylation data, 513 participants
had ﬂavonoid intake data, and 482 participants had methyl nutrients
intake data. The study was approved by the institutional review boards
of all participating institutions. All subjects provided informed
consent.

HRV Measurement HRV was measured in the morning for 7 minutes with a
2channel electrocardiography monitor, and time-domain variability and
frequency-domain variability of the heart rate were obtained as
described previously.3 Observations with HRV measurement time <3.5
minutes were excluded. The root mean square of successive differences
(rMSSD) and standard deviation of normal-to-normal intervals (SDNN) were
measured representing the time domain.21 Lowfrequency (LF) (0.04 to 0.15
Hz) and high-frequency (HF) Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

2

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

sinus node, as reﬂected in reduced HRV, represents a pathophysiologic
mechanism by which air pollution may lead to cardiac mortality,
especially among older individuals.5,6 Notably, HRV shows wide
interindividual variability, as well as highly variable responses to PM
exposure.7 Therefore, HRV is an ideal early surrogate marker of
cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction for identifying underlying factors
that may modify susceptibility to cardiovascular effects of PM exposure.
Furthermore, growing evidence indicates that systemic inﬂammation
exacerbates HRV disturbances following PM exposure.8 PM with aerodynamic
diameter <2.5 lm (PM2.5) is especially deleterious because it penetrates
into the alveoli and may act as a stimulus to trigger local cytokine
production and systemic inﬂammation.9 Thus, immunoregulation is critical
to limiting immune-mediated cardiovascular pathology.10 Molecules
involved in immunoresponses are attractive as potential modulators of
cardiovascular pathology following PM exposure. Toll-like receptors
(TLRs), a group of receptors abundantly expressed on leukocytes, have
emerged as crucial ﬁrst-responders linking innate and adaptive immunity
after environmental challenge.11 Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), in
particular, is a unique TLR family member that not only assists the
clearance of bacterial components contained in PM via pathogen
recognition12 but also modulates the expansion and behavior of
regulatory T cells, which are the dominant circulating regulator of
immunosuppression.13,14 TLR2-related immunity is controlled through
epigenetic mechanisms: Increased methylation in the TLR2 promoter region
is usually associated with TLR2 silencing, while decreased methylation
permits TLR2 expression.15 Therefore, maintaining a proper methylation
level of the TLR2 gene is critical to ensure protective immunity.
Importantly, DNA methylation is reversible, thereby providing unique
opportunities for modulation. This feature is critical, particularly for
pathologies related to nonpreventable exposures, as it can offer
potential interventions to ameliorate exposure-related disease.
Nutrients such as ﬂavonoids and methyl nutrients can modify gene-speciﬁc
methylation in opposite directions.16 Flavonoids, the most common group
of polyphenolic compounds in the human diet, can lower DNA methylation
by reducing DNA methyltransferase activity.17,18 Methyl nutrients such
as folic acid, vitamin B12, and methionine, on the other hand, may
increase methylation by providing methyl donors.19 Thus, determining how
such nutrients alter methylation states can provide insight that may be
used to counteract exposure effects. No study has yet investigated
whether DNA methylation and nutrient intake may modify the
cardiovascular effects of air pollution exposure. In this study, we
hypothesized that programming of TLR2 inactivation by increased
methylation contributes to “epigenetic susceptibility” for immune-medi-

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Participants Available in the Normative Aging Study during Follow-up
(N=727)

With Heart Arrhythmias at Baseline (N=91) Missing PM2.5 Data (N=50)

Without Heart Arrhythmias at Baseline (N=636) Missing Heart Rate
Variability Data (N=13)

Participants for Final Analysis* (N=573)

Participants for Analysis Involving TLR2 Methylation (N=500) Blood
Sample Unavailable for Methylation Analysis (N=73)

Figure 1. The study participants in the Normative Aging Study,
2000--2011. PM2.5 indicates particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter
<2.5 lm; TLR2, Toll-like receptor 2. *In each analysis, some additional
participants may have been excluded due to missing key study variables.
We have noted in each table the corresponding sample size.

(0.15 to 0.4 Hz) power were used to represent the frequency domain.21

Blood TLR2 Methylation and Plasma Inﬂammatory Markers TLR2 methylation
was analyzed on blood samples, collected after overnight fasting, at 5
CpG positions within the promoter region (Figure 2) using
bisulﬁte-treated pyrosequencing, as described previously.22 Exact
positions and pyrosequencing primers were reported previously.20 The
degree of methylation is reported as the ratio of methylated cytosines
over the sum of methylated and unmethylated cytosines (%5mC). Plasma
inﬂammatory markers including IL-6, IL-8, IL-1b, TNFa, TNF-c, C-reactive
protein, intercellular adhesion molecule 1, and vascular endothelial
growth factor were measured using previously described methods.20,22,23

Air Pollution and Weather Data PM2.5 exposure levels across the study
area were estimated based on a validated hybrid spatiotemporal
prediction model,24 which was used in previous epidemiological
studies.25,26 This exposure-assessment method combined real physical
measurements from the MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer) satellite--derived aerosol optical depth and classic
land-use regression methods to predict daily PM2.5 concentration levels
across the Boston area from 2000 to 2011, at a 10910-km spatial
resolution. Kloog and coauthors demonstrated that this method provides
more accurate spatial resolution and unbiased predictions DOI:
10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

compared to prior models27 without compromising temporal resolution.28
For more methodological details of the prediction model please refer to
Kloog et al.28,29 The 48-hour PM2.5 moving averages before each
examination were assigned based on the participants' home addresses. The
48-hour moving averages of outdoor apparent temperature was tabulated
based on outdoor air temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed,
which were obtained from the Boston airport weather station. Black
carbon concentration was measured at the Harvard School of Public Health
monitoring site, 1 km from the examination site, using an aethalometer
(Magee Scientiﬁc, Berkeley, CA).30 Carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide,
and ozone were obtained from the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection local monitoring sites, using a previously
described method.30

FFQ and Nutrient Intake At every visit, detailed information on the
typical daily dietary intake of food and beverage items over the
previous year was assessed with a self-administered validated
semiquantitative FFQ adapted from the questionnaire used in the Nurses'
Health Study. Details on the reproducibility and validity of this FFQ
for estimating daily nutrient intakes,31,32 including ﬂavonoid,33 and
methyl nutrients (folic acid, vitamin B12, and methionine) intake,21
were published elsewhere. To estimate ﬂavonoid intakes, we constructed a
database for assessment of intake of the different ﬂavonoid subclasses
using the updated and expanded U.S. Department of Agriculture ﬂavonoid
content of foods and the proanthocyanidin databases together with other
sources.34,35 Intakes of Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

3

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Figure 2. Schematic view of the genomic structure and CpG dinucleotides
selected for analysis in the Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) gene. The
chromosomal location of the PCR amplicon for the TLR2 gene
pyrosequencing assay is based on the Human Genome Assembly 2009 (GRC37/
hg19) (UCSC Genome Browser). The CpG island, gene promoter region, PSQ
CpG sites, PCR primer, and PSQ sequence primer location are shown in the
ﬁgure. TSS indicates the transcription start site; PCR, polymerase chain
reaction; PSQ, pyrosequencing. Position 1: CpG154605258; Position 2:
CpG154605262; Position 3: CpG154605264; Position 4: CpG154605272;
Position 5: CpG154605276. individual compounds were calculated as the
sum of the consumption frequency of each food multiplied by the content
of the speciﬁc ﬂavonoid for the speciﬁed portion size. For foods in the
FFQ for which there were no values available in the U.S. Department of
Agriculture database, we searched a European database (EuroFIR eBASIS;
http://www.euroﬁr.org) and other sources to ensure all available
high-quality data on ﬂavonoid values could be included in the database.
However, although these other sources served as a validation to the U.S.
Department of Agriculture database, the addition of the EuroFIR data and
the published literature did not contribute to more than 5% to 10% of
the overall data used in the calculation of intakes for this analysis.
For each participant and visit in this analysis, we derived average
daily intakes (mg/day) at each visit of the subclasses commonly consumed
in the U.S. diet. The speciﬁc subclasses included anthocyanins
(cyanidin, delphinidin, malvidin, pelargonidin, DOI:
10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

petunidin, peonidin), ﬂavanones (eriodictyol, hesperetin, naringenin),
ﬂavan-3-ols (catechins, gallocatechins, epicatachin, epigallocatechin,
epicatachin-3-gallate, epigallocatechin-3-gallate), ﬂavonols (quercetin,
kaempferol, myricetin, isohamnetin), ﬂavones (luteolin, apigenin), and
polymers (including proanthocyanidins excluding monomers, theaﬂavins,
and thearubigins). The measure “total ﬂavonoids” represented the sum of
these 6 subclasses. Assessment of daily dietary folic acid intake was
based on the frequency and dosage information from the FFQ. The average
daily total fruit and total vegetable intake (servings/day) was also
measured based on FFQ, over the past year. The estimates were made using
software developed by the Nurses' Health Study at the Channing
Laboratories and processed by Channing Laboratories operators. To avoid
undue inﬂuence of outliers, we excluded all the questionnaires reporting
<500 or >4200 total calories per day. We also truncated ﬂavonoid and
folic acid Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

4

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

Statistical Methods Confounding selection and model assumption For the
analysis involving PM2.5 exposure, TLR2 methylation, and HRV, we
adjusted for potential confounders, selected based on literature
evidence (ie, age, room temperature, outdoor apparent temperature,
season [winter/spring--fall/ summer], household income, weekday of the
visit, and the visit date). To increase efﬁciency, we also adjusted for
the following risk factors for decreased HRV: body mass index (BMI),
smoking status (never/former/current), physical activity, fasting
glucose, alcohol consumption (<2 drinks/d/≥2 drinks/d), hypertension,
and use of calcium channel blockers, b-blockers, and
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. For the analysis examining
ﬂavonoid and methyl nutrients intake as effect modiﬁer(s) for the
association between PM2.5 exposure and HRV, we adjusted for all the
covariates listed above, as well as for total ﬁber, vitamin C, and
caloric intakes. To examine the effect of ﬂavonoid and methyl nutrients
intakes on TLR2 methylation, we adjusted for age, body mass index,
smoking status, total ﬁber, vitamin C, caloric intake, household income,
and physical activity. HR, rMSSD, SDNN, LF, and HF were
log10-transformed to improve normality and stabilize the variance. All
independent variables were ﬁtted as time-varying covariates. Nonlinear
relationships were characterized ﬁrst using graphical analyses between
HRV and all the covariates, as well as between nutrient intakes and TLR2
methylation. When the graphical analyses suggested nonlinear
association, higher-order terms (quadratic, cubic, etc.) were considered
in the model, and a likelihood ratio test was used to determine the
number of higher-order terms needed. In the present study, nonlinearity
between apparent temperature and HRV was accounted for by the use of
linear and quadratic terms. In addition, we utilized the likelihood
ratio test to determine whether it is adequate to model the effect
modiﬁers with a linear trend. Additional analysis using spline
regression models were also used to conﬁrm linearity. To account for
repeated assessments for many participants, all statistical models were
linear mixed-effect models with a random intercept assigned to each
subject, which used compound symmetry covariance structure. A compound
symmetry covariance structure was decided upon after comparing the
Akaike information criterion (AIC) among models with different
covariance structures as well as assessing the ﬁt of the compound
symmetry covariance structure to our data by examining the estimated
residual covariance matrix. An analysis using a robust/sandwich DOI:
10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

estimator for the variance gave very similar results and thus analysis
without use of robust/sandwich variance estimators were reported in the
manuscript. To examine whether any position in the TLR2 promoter region
modiﬁed the association between PM2.5 exposure and HRV, we ﬁtted a
single linear mixed-effect model with 5 interaction terms included in
the model, which are the interactions between each of the 5 TLR2
positions and PM2.5 (in addition to their respective main effects and
other covariates) (Model 1). To test the null hypothesis that none of
the positions modiﬁed the association between PM2.5 exposure and HRV
(H0: c1=c2=. . .=c5=0), the coefﬁcients of these 5 interaction terms
were tested all together using a single Wald test, whose null
distribution is approximated using an F-distribution (global test). Yij
¼ b0 þ b1 PM2:5ij þ b2 X2ij þ . . . þ bp Xpij þ a1 TLR21ij þ . . . þ a5
TLR25ij þ c1 PM2:5ij  TLR21ij þ    þ c5 PM2:5  TLR25ij þ bi þ eij
ðModel 1Þ As a secondary analysis, we also examined the effect
modiﬁcation by position-speciﬁc TLR2 methylation by including an
interaction term between position-speciﬁc TLR2 methylation and PM2.5 in
the model (Model 2), only if the global test was signiﬁcant. Yij ¼ b0 þ
b1 PM2:5ij þ b2 X2ij þ . . . þ bp Xpij þ a1 TLR2kij þ c1 PM2:5  TLR2kij
þ bi þ eij ðModel 2Þ where Yij was the log10 of HRV measures for
participant i at visit j, b0 was the overall intercept, bi was the
separate random intercept for subject i, and bi~N(0, ϴ),eij~N(0, r2).
TLR2kij was the TLR2 methylation level at the kth position (k=15)
within the promoter region, for participant i at visit j. X2ij--Xpij
were the covariates including confounders and predictors for HRV, for
participant i at visit j. To describe the effect modiﬁcation by
potential effect modiﬁers, we estimated from the mixed-effect models the
HRV-PM2.5 associations at the values corresponding to the quartiles of
each effect modiﬁer and reported them separately. We reported effect
estimates, 95% CIs, and P values for the HRV-PM2.5 associations from the
linear mixed-effect models (ie, percent change in HRV per 10 lg/m3
increase in PM2.5) for the midpoint of each quartile. Analyses were
performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).

Results Cohort Characteristics and Exposure Levels The Normative Aging
Study is a cohort of aging individuals, between 55 and 100 years old at
the ﬁrst visit of the present study (Figure 1). We excluded N=91
participants with heart arrhythmias at baseline. An additional N=63
participants were excluded as they had missing outcome (N=13 with
missing Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

5

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

intakes at median39(interquartile range). Fewer than 0.5% of
observations were excluded.

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

(November 2000--December 2011), the 48-hour PM2.5 moving average varied
between 2.14 and 42.8 lg/m3 with an average exposure level of 10.5
lg/m3, which is lower than the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's
daily health National Ambient Air Quality Standard for PM2.5 (35.0 lg/
m3). The baseline mean methylation level across 5 CpG positions (Figure
2) in the TLR2 promoter region ranged between 0.3%5mC and 7.1%5mC. There
was no apparent

Table 1. Baseline Characteristics of Study Participants (N=573), 48-Hour
Moving Average of PM2.5, and Averaged Methylation Across CpG Positions
in the Promoter Region of TLR2 Gene Mean (SD) N (%)

PM2.5 (lg/m3)

TLR2 Methylation (%5mC)

55 to 69

176 (30.7)

11.4 (5.2)

2.9 (1.3)

70 to 79

293 (51.1)

11.7 (6.4)

3.1 (1.3)

80 to 89

97 (16.9)

10.6 (6.1)

2.9 (1.1)

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  90
#+END_QUOTE

7 (1.2)

13.0 (5.0)

3.4 (1.0)

<12

371 (64.8)

11.4 (6.3)

2.93 (1.2)

12 to <30

114 (19.9)

11.3 (5.3)

3.14 (1.4)

≥30

88 (15.4)

11.7 (5.5)

3.08 (1.2)

≥2

106 (18.5)

11.6 (6.7)

2.9 (1.1)

<2

467 (81.5)

11.4 (5.8)

3.0 (1.2)

Yes

111 (19.4)

11.0 (6.0)

2.9 (1.0)

No

462 (80.6)

11.5 (6.0)

3.0 (1.3)

White

549 (95.8)

11.4 (5.9)

3.0 (1.3)

Nonwhite

24 (4.2)

11.6 (7.7)

2.8 (0.9)

405 (70.7)

11.3 (6.0)

3.0 (1.3)

168 (29.3)

11.8 (6.0)

2.9 (1.2)

<25

123 (21.5)

12.4 (6.8)

3.0 (1.2)

≥25

450 (78.5)

11.2 (5.7)

3.0 (1.3)

Never

166 (29.0)

11.7 (6.0)

3.1 (1.4)

Current

26 (4.5)

10.9 (3.8)

3.3 (1.1)

Former

381 (66.5)

11.4 (6.1)

2.9 (1.2)

Yes

272 (47.5)

11.0 (5.4)

3.1 (1.3)

No

301 (52.5)

11.8 (6.5)

2.9 (1.2)

Characteristics

Age, y

Physical activity, MET-h/wk

Alcohol (drinks/d)

Diabetes

Race

Hypertension Yes No BMI, kg/m

2

Smoking

Annual income >$60 000

BMI indicates body mass index; MET, metabolic equivalent of task; PM2.5,
particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter <2.5 lm; TLR2, Toll-like
receptor 2.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

6

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

HRV) or missing exposure (N=50 with missing PM2.5 exposure), giving a
total of N=573. The baseline characteristics of the participants
included in the ﬁnal analysis are given in Table 1. All participants
were male, and 96% were white. Seventy-nine percent of the participants
were overweight, 19% were diabetics, and 71% were hypertensive. The
study population included 5% current smokers and 19% heavy alcohol
drinkers (≥2 drinks/d). During the study period

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

Main Effect of Air Pollutants on HRV Average PM2.5 exposure over the 48
hours before the day of each visit was associated with signiﬁcantly
lowered SDNN and LF, marginally lowered rMSSD and HF, and
nonsigniﬁcantly increased HR. Every 10 lg/m3 increase in the 48-hour
PM2.5 moving average was associated with 7.74% (95% CI, 1.21% to
15.90%; P=0.09), 7.46% (95% CI, 0.99% to 13.50%; P=0.02), 14.18% (95%
CI, 1.14% to 25.49%; P=0.03), and 12.94% (95% CI, 2.36% to 25.96%;
P=0.09) reductions in rMSSD, SDNN, LF, and HF, respectively (Table 2).
Exposure to black carbon, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and ozone
over the 48 hours before the day of each visit was not signiﬁcantly
associated with HR, rMSSD, SDNN, LF, and HF (Table 3).

Modiﬁcation of PM2.5 Effect on HRV by TLR2 Methylation The effect of
48-hour PM2.5 exposure at participants' homes on rMSSD, SDNN, LF, and HF
was signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by the level of methylation within the TLR2
promoter region (P=0.006 for rMSSD; P=0.03 for SDNN; P=0.05 for LF; and
P=0.04 for HF; global test for interaction across 5 positions) (Table
4). PM2.5 exposure had no signiﬁcant effect on HRV in individuals with
low TLR2 methylation, but it showed increasingly negative effects on HRV
as TLR2 methylation increased (Figure 3). For instance, in individuals
with TLR2 methylation within the ﬁrst quartile, every 10 lg/m3 increase
in 48-hour PM2.5 exposure was associated with 8.77% (95% CI, 7.55% to
27.95%; P=0.31), 0.39% (95% CI, 11.76% to 12.45%; P=0.95), 7.25% (95%
CI, 27.74% to 19.06%; P=0.56), and 10.06% (95% CI, 16.25% to 44.64%;
P=0.49) nonsigniﬁcant estimated changes in rMSSD, SDNN, LF, and HF,
respectively (effects estimated at the midpoint of the ﬁrst quartile,
ie, 1.5%

5mC to represent the within-quartile effect; Table 4); on the other
hand, in the fourth TLR2 methylation quartile, every 10 lg/m3 increase
in 48-hour PM2.5 exposure was associated with 26.38% (95% CI, 13.69% to
37.20%; P=0.0002), 13.94% (95% CI, 3.12% to 23.55%; P=0.01), 21.40% (95%
CI, 0.39% to 38.47%; P=0.05), and 34.28% (95% CI, 13.84% to 49.87%;
P=0.003) reductions in rMSSD, SDNN, LF, and HF, respectively (effects
estimated at the midpoint of the fourth quartile, ie, 4.4%5mC to
represent the within-quartile effect). Analysis of individual
position-speciﬁc methylation showed notable effect heterogeneity across
the 5 CpG positions, with stronger effect modiﬁcations by positions 1,
3, and 5 (Table 5).

Association of Flavonoid and Methyl Nutrients Intakes With TLR2
methylation The average daily ﬂavonoid intake over the preceding year
was negatively associated with mean TLR2 methylation, considered as the
average methylation level across 5 CpG positions (5.09% reduction; 95%
CI, 0.12% to 10.06%; per an interquartile-range increase in ﬂavonoid
intake; P=0.05) (Figure 4). In position-speciﬁc analyses (Figure 4 and
Table 6), methylation at TLR2 promoter positions 1 and 4 showed the
strongest associations with ﬂavonoid intake. We did not observe
signiﬁcant association between methyl nutrients (folic acid, vitamin
B12, and methionine) intakes in the previous year and either mean or
position-speciﬁc TLR2 methylation (Figures 4 and 5).

Effect Modiﬁcation by Flavonoid and Methyl Nutrients Intakes Higher
average daily ﬂavonoid intake over the preceding year signiﬁcantly
weakened the association between PM2.5 exposure and LF reduction
(P=0.05), and produced a nonsigniﬁcant attenuation of the effect of
PM2.5 exposure on rMSSD,

Table 2. Effect of 48-Hour Moving Average of PM2.5 on HRV, Normative
Aging Study, 2000--2011 (N=500) Change in HRV Per 10 lg/m3 Increase in
PM2.5 Concentration* HRV Measure

% Change

95% CI

P Value

HR

0.42

0.94 to 1.80

0.55

rMSSD

7.74

15.90 to 1.21

0.09

SDNN

7.46

13.50 to 0.99

0.02

LF

14.18

25.49 to 1.14

0.03

HF

12.94

25.96 to 2.36

0.09

HF indicates high-frequency power (0.15 to 0.4 Hz); HR, heart rate; HRV,
heart rate variability; LF, low-frequency power (0.04 to 0.15 Hz);
PM2.5, particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter <2.5 lm; rMSSD, root
mean square of successive differences; SDNN, standard deviation of
normal-to-normal intervals. *Results were adjusted for age; body mass
index; fasting glucose level; hypertension; smoking status; alcohol
consumption; physical exercise; household income; the use of calcium
channel blocker, b-blocker, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor;
room temperature; outdoor apparent temperature; season; weekday; and
visit date.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

7

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

difference in exposure level or methylation level across different
characteristic subgroups (Table 1).

HF indicates high-frequency power (0.15 to 0.4 Hz); HR, heart rate;
HRV, heart rate variability; LF, low-frequency power (0.04 to 0.15 Hz);
rMSSD, root mean square of successive differences; SDNN, standard
deviation of normal-to-normal intervals. *Results were adjusted for age;
body mass index; fasting glucose level; hypertension; smoking status;
alcohol consumption; physical exercise; household income; the use of
calcium channel blocker, b-blocker, and angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor; room temperature; outdoor apparent temperature; season;
weekday; and visit date.

0.49 18.57 to 10.39 5.19 17.7 to 4.44 7.29 11.45 to 8.67 1.91 HF

0.71

2.55

25.13 to 26.86

0.85

0.21

0.37 17.66 to 7.5 5.92 11.31 to 9.3 1.55 10.82 to 6.68 2.46 LF

0.59

1.61

21.91 to 23.96

0.89

0.77

0.22

0.19

13.2 to 3.3

10.04 to 2.17

5.31

4.13

0.28

0.44

10.08 to 3.11

6.72 to 3.1

3.71

1.93

0.81

0.69

15.63 to 14.15

12.42 to 9.23 2.19

1.86 0.49

0.29

7.59 to 3.88

6.36 to 1.98

2.02

2.28

rMSSD

SDNN

0.16 2.19 to 0.37 0.92 0.76 to 1.27 0.25 0.92 0.82 to 0.92 HR

0.04

0.97

3.16 to 1.28

0.40

0.63

P Value 95% CI % Change/ P Value P Value % Change/ HRV

95% CI

% Change*

95% CI

95% CI % Change* P Value

Ozone Nitrogen Dioxide Carbon Monoxide Black Carbon

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

Zhong et al

SDNN, and HF (P=0.79 for rMSSD; P=0.37 for SDNN; P=0.28 for HF) (Table 7
and Figure 6). PM2.5 exposure had no signiﬁcant effect on LF in
individuals with high ﬂavonoid intake, but it was associated with
increasingly negative effects on LF as ﬂavonoid intakes decreased
(Figure 6). In particular, in individuals at the ﬁrst quartile of
ﬂavonoid intake, every 10 lg/m3 increase in 48-hour PM2.5 exposure was
associated with a 16.48% (95% CI, 1.61% to 31.35%; P=0.07) reduction in
LF (effects estimated at the midpoint of the ﬁrst quartile, ie, 128 mg/d
to represent the within-quartile effect), while no effect was seen for
the second, third, and fourth ﬂavonoid quartile (Table 7). The effect
modiﬁcation by ﬂavonoid intake was abrogated when mean TLR2 methylation
and the interaction between mean TLR2 methylation and PM2.5 exposure
were ﬁtted in the model (Table 8).

Correlation of Plasma Inﬂammatory Markers With TLR2 Methylation
Increased TLR2 methylation level was consistently correlated with
increased plasma intercellular adhesion molecule 1 level, across 5 CpG
positions (P<0.0001, P<0.0001, P=0.0002, P=0.0004, and P=0.0003,
respectively) (Table 9). IL-8 and vascular endothelial growth factor
were also positively correlated with TLR2 methylation level at position
3 (P=0.01, P=0.02, respectively) (Table 9).

Sensitivity Analyses The major sources of dietary ﬂavonoids and folic
acid are fruits and vegetables, which contain other nutrients that are
likely to affect DNA methylation. Therefore, in sensitivity analysis of
models including ﬂavonoids, we adjusted for daily total fruit and
vegetable intake---instead of total vitamin C and ﬁber intake---to
examine the robustness of our ﬁndings. This adjustment only resulted in
minor changes in the effect estimates for the association between
ﬂavonoid and TLR2 methylation, as well as of the effect modiﬁcation by
ﬂavonoid of the effect of PM2.5 exposure on HRV (Tables 6 and 8). Due to
the high tissue and cell-type speciﬁcity of DNA methylation, DNA
methylation in whole blood might be affected by differences in the
proportions of leukocyte cell types.36 We therefore examined the
correlation between the percentage of speciﬁc leukocyte types (ie,
eosinophils, lymphocytes, neutrophils, monocytes, and basophils) and
TLR2 methylation level. Among these 5 leukocyte types, the percentage of
lymphocytes and neutrophils in total blood cells were correlated with
TLR2 methylation (Table 10). Therefore, we performed sensitivity
analysis adjusted for lymphocyte and neutrophil percentages. Our ﬁndings
were not affected by this adjustment (Table 11). Journal of the American
Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

8

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 3. Effect of 48-Hour Moving Average of Black Carbon, Carbon
Monoxide, Nitrogen Dioxide, and Ozone on HRV, Normative Aging Study,
2000--2011 (N=573)

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 4. Effect of PM2.5 Exposure on HRV at Different Mean TLR2
Methylation Levels, Normative Aging Study, 2000--2011 (N=500) Mean TLR2
Methylation

% Change*

95% CI

P Value

Midpoint of Q1 (1.5 5mc%)

0.56

2.88 to 1.82

0.64

Midpoint of Q2 (2.2 5mc%)

0.10

1.99 to 1.81

0.92

Midpoint of Q3 (3.0 5mc%)

0.42

1.25 to 2.11

0.62

Midpoint of Q4 (4.4 5mc%)

1.34

0.92 to 3.66

0.25

HR

Pglobal for interaction

†

0.62

rMSSD Midpoint of Q1 (1.5 5mc%)

8.77

7.55 to 27.95

0.31

Midpoint of Q2 (2.2 5mc%)

1.01

13.14 to 12.81

0.88

Midpoint of Q3 (3.0 5mc%)

11.11

20.87 to 0.16

0.05

Midpoint of Q4 (4.4 5mc%)

26.38

37.20 to 13.69

0.0002

Pglobal for interaction

†

0.006

SDNN Midpoint of Q1 (1.5 5mc%)

0.39

11.76 to 12.45

0.95

Midpoint of Q2 (2.2 5mc%)

3.85

12.78 to 6.00

0.43

Midpoint of Q3 (3.0 5mc%)

7.65

15.31 to 0.71

0.07

Midpoint of Q4 (4.4 5mc%)

13.94

23.55 to 3.12

0.01

Pglobal for interaction

†

0.03

LF Midpoint of Q1 (1.5 5mc%)

7.25

27.74 to 19.06

0.56

Midpoint of Q2 (2.2 5mc%)

10.88

27.11 to 8.96

0.26

Midpoint of Q3 (3.0 5mc%)

14.86

28.80 to 1.81

0.08

Midpoint of Q4 (4.4 5mc%)

21.40

38.47 to 0.39

0.05

Pglobal for interaction†

0.05

HF Midpoint of Q1 (1.5 5mc%)

10.06

16.25 to 44.64

0.49

Midpoint of Q2 (2.2 5mc%)

2.82

22.02 to 21.10

0.80

Midpoint of Q3 (3.0 5mc%)

15.71

30.75 to 2.60

0.09

Midpoint of Q4 (4.4 5mc%)

34.28

49.87 to 13.84

0.003

Pglobal for interaction†

0.04

Results were adjusted for age; body mass index; fasting glucose level;
hypertension; smoking status; alcohol consumption; physical exercise;
household income; the use of calcium channel blocker, b-blocker, and
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; room temperature; outdoor
apparent temperature; season; weekday; and visit date. Q1, Q2, Q3, and
Q4 indicate the ﬁrst, second, third, and fourth quartile. HF indicates
high-frequency power (0.15 to 0.4 Hz); HR, heart rate; HRV, heart rate
variability; LF, low-frequency power (0.04 to 0.15 Hz); PM2.5,
particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter <2.5 lm; rMSSD, root mean
square of successive differences; SDNN, standard deviation of
normal-to-normal intervals; TLR2, Toll-like receptor 2. *The percent
change in HRV per 10 lg/m3 increase in PM2.5 concentration. † Based on a
global test for effect modiﬁcation by position-speciﬁc methylation.
Interaction terms between each of the 5 TLR2 positions and PM2.5 were
included in the model, and these 5 interaction terms were tested jointly
for effect modiﬁcation using a Wald test (global test).

Discussion This study on a cohort of aging male Boston-area residents
demonstrated the adverse impact of short-term PM2.5 exposure estimated
at the home address on HRV. In addition, novel ﬁndings showed that
individuals with higher methylation DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

in the TLR2 gene promoter are more susceptible to reduced HRV after
PM2.5 exposure, compared to those with lower methylation levels.
Furthermore, higher ﬂavonoid intake in the year preceding the
examination signiﬁcantly lowered TLR2 methylation, and attenuated the
association between PM2.5 exposure and the LF measure of HRV. Journal of
the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

9

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

Position

Methylation

% Change*

95% CI

P Value

HR 1

7.26

8.65 to 25.94

0.39

1.66

9.79 to 14.56

0.79

Midpoint of Q2

0.42

1.38 to 2.24

0.65

4.56

15.66 to 8.01

0.46

4.30

12.71 to 4.93

0.35

Midpoint of Q3

0.46

1.22 to 2.17

0.60

13.25

22.84 to 2.47

0.02

8.91

16.51 to 0.63

0.04

Midpoint of Q4

0.53

1.72 to 2.83

0.65

26.01

36.84 to 13.31

0.0002

16.11

25.42 to 5.64

0.004

0.92

0.0009

0.02

Midpoint of Q1

0.08

2.12 to 2.34

0.94

0.21

14.47 to 16.43

0.98

7.00

17.08 to 4.3

0.22

Midpoint of Q2

0.28

1.49 to 2.09

0.76

6.61

17.49 to 5.72

0.28

7.36

15.51 to 1.58

0.10

Midpoint of Q3

0.44

1.23 to 2.13

0.61

11.33

21.1 to 0.35

0.04

7.64

15.31 to 0.73

0.07

Midpoint of Q4

0.75

1.4 to 2.95

0.50

20.06

31.31 to 6.98

0.004

8.20

17.98 to 2.74

0.14

0.65

0.03

0.86

Midpoint of Q1

0.82

3.19 to 1.61

0.51

5.96

10.3 to 25.17

0.50

1.15

10.63 to 14.49

0.86

Midpoint of Q2

0.16

1.99 to 1.71

0.86

3.69

15.24 to 9.44

0.56

3.72

12.44 to 5.87

0.43

Midpoint of Q3

0.37

1.3 to 2.07

0.67

10.77

20.6 to 0.28

0.06

7.44

15.13 to 0.94

0.08

Midpoint of Q4

1.27

0.85 to 3.44

0.24

21.64

32.48 to 9.05

0.00

13.45

22.51 to 3.33

0.01

0.18

0.005

0.05

Midpoint of Q1

0.28

2.62 to 2.12

0.82

2.48

12.89 to 20.56

0.77

4.43

15.3 to 7.83

0.46

Midpoint of Q2

0.11

1.73 to 1.99

0.90

4.88

16.33 to 8.13

0.44

6.13

14.66 to 3.25

0.19

Midpoint of Q3

0.45

1.22 to 2.15

0.60

10.81

20.64 to 0.23

0.06

7.57

15.25 to 0.8

0.08

Midpoint of Q4

1.10

1.08 to 3.32

0.33

21.06

32.16 to 8.15

0.002

10.25

19.8 to 0.45

0.38

0.01

0.06 0.43

Midpoint of Q1

1.24

3.63 to 1.2

0.32

6.37

9.99 to 25.69

0.47

1.72

10.17 to 15.19

0.79

Midpoint of Q2

0.31

2.15 to 1.57

0.75

3.71

15.29 to 9.45

0.56

3.62

12.39 to 6.02

0.45

Midpoint of Q3

0.48

1.2 to 2.18

0.58

11.31

21.05 to 0.36

0.04

7.82

15.46 to 0.52

0.07

Midpoint of Q4

1.81

0.34 to 4

0.10

22.79

33.47 to 10.39

0.0007

14.49

23.45 to 4.47

0.05 LF

0.003

11.35

30.67 to 13.36

0.34

1.00

22.87 to 32.27

0.94

Midpoint of Q2

13.74

28.64 to 4.28

0.13

9.74

26.73 to 11.19

0.34

Midpoint of Q3

15.64

29.53 to 0.98

0.06

17.68

32.53 to 0.45

0.06

Midpoint of Q4

18.73

36.26 to 3.64

0.10

29.38

46.1 to 7.48

0.01

0.61

0.06

Midpoint of Q1

17.70

34.99 to 4.19

0.11

5.94

27.43 to 21.91

0.64

Midpoint of Q2

16.04

30.54 to 1.48

0.07

11.67

28.3 to 8.83

0.24

Midpoint of Q3

14.72

28.69 to 1.99

0.08

15.90

30.99 to 2.48

0.09

Midpoint of Q4

12.02

30.33 to 11.11

0.28

23.77

41.18 to 1.22

P for interaction†

0.006 0.03

HF

Midpoint of Q1

P for interaction† 2

P Value

0.76

P for interaction†

1

95% CI

SDNN

1.96 to 2.75

P for interaction† 5

% Change*

0.36

P for interaction† 4

P Value

Midpoint of Q1

P for interaction† 3

95% CI

rMSSD

P for interaction† 2

% Change*

0.67

0.04 0.22

Continued DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

10

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 5. Effect Modiﬁcation by Position-Speciﬁc TLR2 Methylation on the
Association Between PM2.5 Exposure and HRV (N=500)

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 5. Continued

Position

Methylation

% Change*

95% CI

P Value

% Change*

95% CI

P Value

3

Midpoint of Q1

4.93

18.73 to 35.46

0.71

10.57

16.54 to 46.49

0.48

Midpoint of Q2

6.44

23.08 to 13.79

0.51

4.44

22.97 to 18.55

0.68

Midpoint of Q3

14.64

28.62 to 2.06

0.08

14.96

30.18 to 3.58

0.11

Midpoint of Q4

26.97

41.87 to 8.26

0.007

30.26

45.83 to 10.2

0.005

P for interaction† 4

0.03

5

12.69

31.92 to 11.98

0.29

0.15

24.04 to 31.25

0.99

Midpoint of Q2

13.86

29.23 to 4.84

0.14

8.49

26.31 to 13.62

0.42

Midpoint of Q3

14.86

28.79 to 1.8

0.08

15.14

30.32 to 3.36

0.10

Midpoint of Q4

16.72

33.93 to 4.96

0.12

26.43

42.95 to 5.13

0.77

P Value

0.02 0.09

Midpoint of Q1

1.26

23.57 to 27.57

0.92

15.29

12.68 to 52.22

0.32

Midpoint of Q2

9.27

25.47 to 10.46

0.33

3.32

21.96 to 19.78

0.76

Midpoint of Q3

15.39

29.24 to 1.17

0.07

16.41

31.27 to 1.68

0.07

Midpoint of Q4

24.79

40.16 to 5.46

0.01

34.57

49.1 to 15.88

0.001

P for interaction†

95% CI

0.01

Midpoint of Q1

P for interaction†

% Change*

0.10

0.002

HF indicates high-frequency power (0.15 to 0.4 Hz); HR, heart rate; HRV,
heart rate variability; LF, low-frequency power (0.04 to 0.15 Hz);
PM2.5, particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter <2.5 lm; Q1, Q2, Q3,
and Q4 indicate the ﬁrst, second, third, and fourth quartile; rMSSD,
root mean square of successive differences; SDNN, standard deviation of
normal-tonormal intervals; TLR2, Toll-like receptor 2. *The percent
change in HRV per 10 lg/m3 increase in PM2.5 concentration. Results were
adjusted for age; body mass index; fasting glucose level; hypertension;
smoking status; alcohol consumption; physical exercise; household
income; the use of calcium channel blocker, b-blocker, and
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; room temperature; outdoor
apparent temperature; season; weekday; and visit date. † To examine
effect modiﬁcation by position-speciﬁc TLR2 methylation, an interaction
term between position-speciﬁc TLR2 methylation and PM2.5 was included in
the model.

PM exposure is a modiﬁable factor that contributes to cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality, particularly in the acute exposure period, as
emphasized by the recent American Heart Association statement on air
pollution.2 Consistent with our previous study,30 we observed the
strongest effect on HRV from PM2.5 among major types of air pollutants.
The negative association between short-term PM2.5 exposure and HRV has
been repeatedly observed in general population samples,37 cardiac and
hypertensive patients,38 asthmatic adults,39 young adults,40 and older
adults,4,30 as well as in a recent meta-analysis of 29 different studies
(N=18 667).41 The present study showed effects of PM2.5 exposure across
4 different indices of HRV, but not on HR. This ﬁnding suggests that
short-term PM2.5 exposure may affect the cardiac interbeat intervals
before any appreciable inﬂuence is detected on HR. SDNN, a marker of the
cyclic components, represents the total variability over the 7 minutes
of ECG monitoring. LF variability is linked to the activity of both the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system, whereas HF and rMSSD are
sensitive to high-frequency heart period ﬂuctuDOI:
10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

ations and reﬂect the parasympathetic nervous activity. The HRV
reductions associated with PM2.5 in these 4 indices may reﬂect
pathophysiological changes in cardiac autonomic balance following
exposure, which could be a potential mechanism linking air pollution and
cardiac morbidity and mortality in the aging population.5 Many
epidemiological studies4,30 have presented a wide interindividual
variability in responses to short-term air pollution, possibly due to
biological characteristics.7 For example, preexisting cardiac
conditions, diabetes, and polymorphism of genes involved in endothelial
function may confer higher susceptibility to autonomic dysfunction
induced by PM2.5 exposure.4,30 However, these characteristics are either
nonmodiﬁable or already well-recognized conditions with speciﬁc
treatment guidelines. This study revealed that increased TLR2
methylation is linked with intensiﬁed inﬂammatory responses, as reﬂected
in elevated plasma IL-8, intercellular adhesion molecule 1, and vascular
endothelial growth factor level. In addition, we demonstrated that low
TLR2 methylation, an epigenetic mechanism ensuring immunoregulation,
reduces the adverse effects of PM2.5 exposure Journal of the American
Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

11

Zhong et al

2

2

0 -2

-4 10

20

-4

-2

-2

0

Change in log10SDNN

Change in log10rMSSD

0

Change in log10HR

-4

Pglobal for Interaction = 0.62

Pglobal for Interaction = 0.03

Pglobal for Interaction = 0.006 30

40

10

PM2.5 (ug/m3)

20

30

40

10

20

30

40

PM2.5 (ug/m3)

-2

0

TLR2 Methylation = Midpoint of Q1 (1.5 %5mC) TLR2 Methylation = Midpoint
of Q2 (2.2 %5mC) TLR2 Methylation = Midpoint of Q3 (3.0 %5mC) TLR2
Methylation = Midpoint of Q4 (4.4 %5mC)

-4

-4

-2

0

Change in log10LF

Change in log10HF

2

PM2.5 (ug/m3)

2

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

2

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Pglobal for Interaction = 0.04

Pglobal for Interaction = 0.05 10

20

30

40

10

PM2.5 (ug/m3)

20

30

40

PM2.5 (ug/m3)

Figure 3. The effect of particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter
<2.5 lm (PM2.5) exposure on heart rate variability (HRV) at different
mean Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) methylation levels, Normative Aging
Study, 2000--2011 (N=500). log10HR indicates log10-transformed heart
rate; log10rMSSD, log10-transformed root mean square of the successive
differences; log10SDNN, log10-transformed standard deviation of
normal-to-normal intervals; log10LF, log10-transformed low-frequency
power (0.04 to 0.15 Hz); log10HF, log10-transformed high-frequency power
(0.15 to 0.4 Hz); Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 indicate the ﬁrst, second, third,
and fourth quartiles. The association of PM2.5 with rMSSD, SDNN, LF, and
HF is modiﬁed by mean TLR2 methylation levels, as indicated by the
different slopes. The 4 lines in each ﬁgure represent the relationship
between PM2.5 and HRV when the mean TLR2 methylation level is at the
midpoints of each quartile. If there was no effect modiﬁcation, the 4
lines would be the same. The Pglobal for interaction was based on a
global test for effect modiﬁcation by position-speciﬁc methylation.
Interaction terms between each of the 5 TLR2 positions and PM2.5 were
included in the model, and these 5 interaction terms were tested jointly
for effect modiﬁcation using a Wald test (global test). Results were
adjusted for age; body mass index; fasting glucose level; hypertension;
smoking status; alcohol consumption; physical exercise; household
income; the use of calcium channel blocker, b-blocker, and
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; room temperature; outdoor
apparent temperature; season; weekday; and visit date.

on HRV. TLR2 provides a critical line of protection by inducing
regulatory T cells to limit immune-mediated damage.13,14 Netea et al
reported a 50% decrease in the number of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells
accompanied by an impaired release of immunosuppressive cytokines in
TLR2 null mice compared with wild-type mice, demonstrating the role of
TLR2 in immunoregulation.14 These ﬁndings support our hypothesis that
high TLR2 methylation, an epigenetic process associated with suppressed
TLR2 expression, conveys susceptibility to PM exposure-induced HRV
reductions by decreasing immunoregulation. Our data presented notable
effect heterogeneity across the 5 CpG positions within the TLR2 promoter
region. The DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

distance from position 1 to position 5 is <20 base pairs; thus, these
sites are likely to share most of the same functional complexes and
traits (ie, CpG islands, DNaseI hypersensitivity, nuclease
accessibility, and histone modiﬁcations [UCSC genome browser]) (Figure
2). However, differential methylation patterns across 5 positions have
been observed in the ENCODE project, as identiﬁed by the Illumina
Inﬁnium Human Methylation 450 Bead Array platform. This suggests that
variable methylation patterns exist at these sites even though the CpGs
share common functional complexes. TLR2 methylation is sensitive to
dietary and other behavioral factors.42 In particular, ﬂavonoids, a
major Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

12

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

Adjusted for Total Fruit and Vegetable Intake (N=482)†

Original Model (N=497)*

Position 1

% Change

95% CI

P Value

% Change

95% CI

P Value

10.02

17.37 to 2.66

<0.01

8.47

15.94 to 1.01

0.03

Position 2

3.81

10.31 to 2.69

0.25

2.51

9.33 to 4.30

0.48

Position 3

4.49

12.11 to 3.14

0.25

4.28

12.11 to 3.55

0.28

Position 4

6.05

12.74 to 0.65

0.08

6.61

13.51 to 0.29

0.06

Position 5

3.31

14.26 to 7.64

0.55

4.82

16.12 to 6.48

0.41

Mean

5.09

10.06 to 0.12

0.05

4.99

10.16 to 0.17

0.06

TLR2 indicates Toll-like receptor 2. *Results were adjusted for age,
year of visit, body mass index, total caloric intake, total vitamin C
intake, total ﬁber intake, smoking status, household income, and
physical activity. † In addition to all the covariates in the original
model except total vitamin C and ﬁber intake, results were adjusted for
total fruit and vegetable intake.

ﬂavonoid intake over the previous year is negatively associated with
TLR2 methylation, indicating that adequate ﬂavonoid intake may be
essential to maintain a low, protective TLR2 methylation level. In
addition, we showed that increased ﬂavonoid intake alleviates the
adverse effect

subtype of polyphenols, are established inhibitors for
methylation-induced gene silencing.17,18 Flavonoids inhibit the activity
of DNA methyltransferase in a dose--response manner, reverse DNA
methylation, and can reactivate silenced genes.17,18,43 Our study showed
that dietary

% Change in TLR2 Methylation per IQR Increase in flavonoid

10.00 5.00 0.00 P = 0.25

P = 0.05

-5.00

P = 0.25

P = 0.55 P = 0.08

P < 0.01

-10.00 -15.00 -20.00

Position 1

Position 2

% Change in TLR2 Methylation per IQR Increase in folic acid

Mean 30.00 25.00 20.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 0.00 -5.00 -10.00 -15.00 -20.00

Position 3

Position 4

Position 5

Position-specific

P = 0.22

P = 0.13 P = 0.60

P = 0.50

P = 0.92

P = 0.14

Position 1 Mean

Position 2

Position 3

Position 4

Position 5

Position-specific

Figure 4. Effect of dietary ﬂavonoid (N=497) and folic acid (N=482)
intake on mean and position-speciﬁc Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2)
methylation. IQR indicates interquartile range. Results were adjusted
for age, body mass index, total caloric intake, total vitamin C intake,
total ﬁber intake, smoking status, household income, and physical
activity. DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

13

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 6. Effect of Dietary Flavonoid Intake on Mean and Position-Speciﬁc
TLR2 Methylation, Adjusted for Total Fruit and Vegetable Intake

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Change % in TLR2 Methylation per IQR Increase in Vitamin B12

15.00 10.00 5.00

P = 0.49 0.00

P = 0.62

P = 0.87

P = 0.53

P = 0.88

-5.00

P = 0.36

-10.00 -15.00 Position 1

Position 2

Position 3

Mean

Position 4

Position 5

Position-specific

Change % in TLR2 Methylation per IQR Increase in Methionine

15.00 10.00 5.00 0.00 -5.00

P = 0.10

-10.00

P = 0.17

P = 0.46

P = 0.83

P = 0.14

P = 0.16

-15.00 -20.00 -25.00 -30.00 -35.00 Position 1

Position 2

Mean

Position 3

Position 4

Position 5

Position-specific

Figure 5. Effect of dietary vitamin B12 (N=497) and methionine (N=482)
intake on mean and position-speciﬁc Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2)
methylation. IQR indicates interquartile range. Results were adjusted
for age, body mass index, total caloric intake, total vitamin C intake,
total ﬁber intake, smoking status, household income, and physical
activity.

of PM2.5 exposure on LF, and the effect modiﬁcation is diminished when
the model is adjusted for TLR2 methylation. This ﬁnding suggests that,
at least in part, the average daily ﬂavonoid intake over the preceding
year affects individual susceptibility to postexposure HRV reduction by
modulating TLR2 methylation level. However, formal mediation analysis
was not performed in the present study due to the lack of appropriate
statistical methodology to identify the potential pathway between 2
effect modiﬁers in repeated-measure data. We also investigated a group
of methyl nutrients including folic acid, vitamin B12, and methionine,
which are essential components in the 1-carbon metabolism pathway that
is expected to favor higher blood DNA methylation.19 However, no
evidence to date demonstrates whether methyl nutrients can speciﬁcally
modulate immune genes.44 Our analysis did not show signiﬁcant
correlation between methyl nutrients intakes and TLR2 methylation
status. In our previously published study, PM2.5 was negatively
associated with HRV in subjects with lower vitamin B12 and methionine
intakes, but not in the higherDOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

intake groups. Our ﬁndings indicated that the effect modiﬁcation by
vitamin B12 and methionine intake reported in our previous study is
likely to act through a different mechanism, independent of TLR2
methylation. This study has several strengths, including its prospective
study design and relatively large sample size that enabled us to
determine effect modiﬁcations by TLR2 methylation and ﬂavonoid intakes.
To demonstrate the power of the present study, we performed
simulation-based power calculation using linear mixed-effect models with
compound symmetry covariance structure, accounting for covariates
adjustments. Speciﬁcally, we generated 1000 simulated data sets, each
with N=500 independent subjects, in which each subject had 2
(correlated) observations. The exposure, effect modiﬁer, and outcome
were assumed to be normally distributed. A random intercept linear
mixed-effect model (with compound symmetry correlation structure) was
then ﬁtted to each of the simulated data sets. Using effect sizes for
both the main effect of PM2.5 exposure and the effect modiﬁcation after
adjustment for covariates estimated from our data, we expected to
Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

14

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

Flavonoid Intake

% Change*

95% CI

P Value

Midpoint of Q1 (128 mg/d)

0.06

1.65 to 1.80

0.95

Midpoint of Q2 (228 mg/d)

0.00

1.51 to 1.53

1.00

Midpoint of Q3 (370 mg/d)

0.09

1.45 to 1.30

0.90

Midpoint of Q4 (673 mg/d)

0.26

1.98 to 1.48

0.76

HR

P for interaction

0.76

rMSSD Midpoint of Q1 (128 mg/d)

5.32

16.91 to 7.88

0.41

Midpoint of Q2 (228 mg/d)

4.94

15.25 to 6.62

0.39

Midpoint of Q3 (370 mg/d)

4.41

13.82 to 6.03

0.39

Midpoint of Q4 (673 mg/d)

3.25

15.28 to 10.49

0.63

P for interaction

0.79

SDNN Midpoint of Q1 (128 mg/d)

6.14

14.57 to 3.11

0.19

Midpoint of Q2 (228 mg/d)

5.22

12.74 to 2.95

0.20

Midpoint of Q3 (370 mg/d)

3.89

10.81 to 3.56

0.30

Midpoint of Q4 (673 mg/d)

1.00

10.03 to 8.93

0.84

P for interaction

0.37

LF Midpoint of Q1 (128 mg/d)

16.48

31.35 to 1.61

0.07

Midpoint of Q2 (228 mg/d)

12.55

26.37 to 3.87

0.13

Midpoint of Q3 (370 mg/d)

6.65

20.07 to 9.03

0.39

Midpoint of Q4 (673 mg/d)

7.31

12.16 to 31.11

0.49

P for interaction

0.05

HF Midpoint of Q1 (128 mg/d)

10.42

28.69 to 12.54

0.34

Midpoint of Q2 (228 mg/d)

7.78

24.49 to 12.63

0.43

Midpoint of Q3 (370 mg/d)

3.89

19.74 to 15.09

0.67

Midpoint of Q4 (673 mg/d)

4.96

16.93 to 32.63

0.68

P for interaction

0.28

Results were adjusted for age; body mass index; total caloric intake;
total vitamin C intake; total ﬁber intake; fasting glucose level;
hypertension; smoking status; alcohol consumption; physical exercise;
household income; the use of calcium channel blocker, b-blocker, and
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; room temperature; outdoor
apparent temperature; season; weekday; and visit date. HF indicates
high-frequency power (0.15 to 0.4 Hz); HR, heart rate; HRV, heart rate
variability; LF, low-frequency power (0.04 to 0.15 Hz); PM2.5,
particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter <2.5 lm; Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4
indicate the ﬁrst, second, third, and fourth quartile; rMSSD, root mean
square of successive differences; SDNN, standard deviation of
normal-to-normal intervals. *The percent change in HRV per 10 lg/m3
increase in PM2.5 concentration.

have >90% power to detect the observed main effect of PM on HRV indices,
and >80% power to detect the observed effect modiﬁcation by TLR2
methylation and ﬂavonoid intakes at a=0.05 level. Exposure
misclassiﬁcation, which is inherent in epidemiological studies on air
pollution, is a limitation of the present study. Most previous studies
relied on a few monitoring sites in the study area as surrogates for
recent PM2.5 exposure history; that approach introduced DOI:
10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

measurement errors leading to underestimation of the effect.45 We
reduced misclassiﬁcation by using a novel, validated, hybrid prediction
model to assess temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposure
level,24 and the observed effect size of PM2.5 exposure on HRV is larger
compared to a previous study from the same cohort using monitoring site
data.4 This prediction model accounted for the spatial variability of
PM2.5 concentration within the study area and Journal of the American
Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

15

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 7. Effect of PM2.5 Exposure on HRV at Different Daily Flavonoid
Intake Levels, Normative Aging Study, 2000--2011 (N=513)

HF indicates high-frequency power (0.15 to 0.4 Hz); HR, heart rate;
HRV, heart rate variability; LF, low-frequency power (0.04 to 0.15 Hz);
PM2.5, particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter <2.5 lm; rMSSD, root
mean square of successive differences; SDNN, standard deviation of
normal-to-normal intervals; TLR2, Toll-like receptor 2. *Results were
adjusted for age; body mass index; total caloric intake; total vitamin C
intake; total ﬁber intake; fasting glucose level; hypertension; smoking
status; alcohol consumption; physical exercise; household income; the
use of calcium channel blocker, b-blocker, and angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor; room temperature; outdoor apparent temperature;
season; weekday, and visit date. † In addition to all the covariates in
the original model except total vitamin C and ﬁber intake, results were
adjusted for total fruit and vegetable intake. ‡ In addition to all the
covariates in the original model, results were adjusted for mean TLR2
methylation, and the interaction between mean TLR2 methylation and PM2.5
concentration. § The additional percent change in HRV associated with 10
lg/m3 PM2.5 concentration, compared to participants with 1 interquartile
range lower ﬂavonoid intake level.

0.48 12.28 to 32.10 7.65 0.40 9.17 to 27.59 0.28 8.98 HF

6.93 to 27.62

7.65

0.30 8.39 to 33.24 0.05 14.63 LF

0.27 to 31.03

15.81

0.50 to 33.45

0.04

10.48

0.62 6.49 to 11.87 2.28 0.42 3.88 to 9.88 0.37 2.98 SDNN

3.43 to 9.81

2.77

0.99

0.30 0.72 to 2.52

11.28 to 12.87 0.07

0.89 0.62

0.89 8.45 to 10.7

1.48 to 0.90 0.30

0.67

0.76

0.79 7.38 to 10.51 rMSSD

1.32 to 0.98 0.18

1.17

HR

P for Interaction 95% CI % Change§ P for Interaction P for Interaction

95% CI % Change§ 95% CI % Change§ HRV Measure

Adjusted for Mean TLR2 Methylation (N=423)‡ Adjusted for Total Fruit and
Vegetable Intake (N=482)† Original Model (N=513)*

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

Zhong et al

produced more accurate estimates of recent PM2.5 exposure at a 10910-km
resolution. The Boston metropolitan area comprises 15 corresponding
model grid cells, and the use of the cell-speciﬁc predictions for each
participant enabled us to assign different exposure levels to
participants on a relatively small grid based on their residential
areas.26 Although measurement error cannot be completely avoided, it was
unlikely to be associated with participants' HRV status. Therefore,
misclassiﬁcation is likely nondifferential and is expected to bias our
result toward the null. Acknowledging that confounding is a critical
concern in any observational study, we included in regression models an
extensive list of covariates. We conducted further analysis to evaluate
the sensitivity of our results to covariate speciﬁcation, and our
results were stable and robust. We also examined the correlation between
48-hour and 1-year moving average of PM2.5 to rule out the possibility
that the observed effect was partially due to correlation of the 48hour
moving average with long-term exposure to PM2.5. These 2 exposure
metrics were not correlated (R2=0.07); therefore, the association
between the 48-hour moving average of PM2.5 and HRV was unlikely to be
confounded by long-term PM2.5 exposure. In addition, all HRV measures
were conducted at the same time of the day to eliminate confounding due
to diurnal variation. While residual confounding due to unmeasured
variables is not unlikely, chances that the observed association and
effect modiﬁcation reﬂected bias resulting from residual confounding are
minimized. We acknowledge several other limitations in the present
study. During the follow-up of the present study---when data on PM
exposure are available---there were 636 eligible Normative Aging Study
participants (Figure 1). However, our analysis only included a study
population of 573 participants due to missing PM exposure or HRV data.
To examine whether the ﬁnal analysis sample is different from the
eligible population, we compared key baseline characteristics (age,
race, physical activity, alcohol consumption, smoking status,
hypertension, diabetes, and household annual income) between
participants excluded in the ﬁnal analysis due to missing exposure or
outcome (N=63) and the participants for ﬁnal analysis (N=573), and no
signiﬁcant difference was observed (data not shown). In addition, in the
analysis investigating effect modiﬁcation by TLR2 methylation, 73 of 573
participants were excluded due to lack of DNA samples for methylation
analysis. In the analysis of ﬂavonoid intake and TLR2 methylation, 60 of
573 participants were excluded due to lack of FFQ data. However, based
on the study operations, it is reasonable to assume that the missingness
was independent of participants' exposure level, HRV status, and
methylation states. We compared the HRV measures between those with
complete data (N=500/N=513) and Journal of the American Heart
Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

16

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 8. Effect Modiﬁcation by Flavonoid Intake on the Association
Between PM2.5 Exposure and HRV, Adjusted for Total Fruit and Vegetable
Intake, and Adjusted for Mean TLR2 Methylation

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

10

2 0 -2 -4

-4

-2

-2

0

0

Change in log10SDNN

Change in log10rMSSD

2

Change in log10HR

-4

Pinteraction = 0.76

Pinteraction = 0.79 20

10

40

(ug/m3)

Pinteraction = 0.37 20

PM2.5

30

40

10

20

PM2.5

(ug/m3)

30

40

(ug/m3)

Flavonoid = Midpoint of Q4 (673 mg/d) Flavonoid = Midpoint of Q3 (370
mg/d) Flavonoid = Midpoint of Q2 (228 mg/d) Flavonoid = Midpoint of Q1
(128 mg/d)

-4

-4

-2

-2

0

0

Change in log10LF

Change in log10HF

2

2

PM2.5

30

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

2

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Pinteraction = 0.28

Pinteraction = 0.05 10

20

30

40

10

PM2.5 (ug/m3)

20

30

40

PM2.5 (ug/m3)

Figure 6. The effect of particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter
<2.5 lm (PM2.5) exposure on heart rate variability (HRV) at different
ﬂavonoid intake levels, Normative Aging Study, 2000--2011 (N=513).
log10HR indicates log10-transformed heart rate; log10rMSSD,
log10transformed root mean square of the successive differences;
log10SDNN, log10-transformed standard deviation of normal-to-normal
intervals; log10LF, log10-transformed low-frequency power (0.04 to 0.15
Hz); log10HF, log10-transformed high-frequency power (0.15 to 0.4 Hz);
Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 indicate the ﬁrst, second, third, and fourth
quartiles. The association of PM2.5 on rMSSD, SDNN, LF, and HF is
modiﬁed by ﬂavonoid intake, as indicated by the different slopes. The 4
lines in each ﬁgure represent the relationship between PM2.5 and HRV
when the ﬂavonoid intake is at the midpoints of each quartile. If there
was no effect modiﬁcation, the 4 lines would be the same. Results were
adjusted for age; body mass index; total caloric intake; total vitamin C
intake; total ﬁber intake; fasting glucose level; hypertension; smoking
status; alcohol consumption; physical exercise; household income; the
use of calcium channel blocker, b-blocker, and angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor; room temperature; outdoor apparent temperature;
season; weekday; and visit date.

those without (N=73/N=60), and no apparent difference was observed (data
not shown). Therefore, selection bias due to informative missingness in
this study was unlikely. Both the within-person and between-person
effects contributed to the effect modiﬁcation by TLR2 methylation.
However, during the study period, the effect modiﬁcation by TLR2
methylation was mostly due to between-person effects, as when the models
were adjusted for subject identiﬁcation, the signiﬁcance of effect
modiﬁcation was diminished (data not shown). Due to the limited number
of within-subject repeated visits, we were unable to identify the exact
magnitude of effect modiﬁcation by TLR2 methylation within subject. In
addition, our ﬁndings are limited to male older individuals who were
residing in a lightly polluted urban area. Therefore, the conclusion
might not be generalizable to young adults, females, or people living
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

in other areas, due to differential environmental and physiological
factors. Finally, alveolar inﬂammation and the subsequent systemic
inﬂammation are essential, but not the only mechanism linking PM2.5
exposure and cardiac dysfunction. For example, particles may perturb the
autonomic nervous system balance via interaction with lung receptors; a
small fraction of PM (ultraﬁne particles, and some PM constituents such
as organic compounds and metals) may translocate into the systemic
circulation.2 Due to the less-than-comprehensive analysis on plasma
inﬂammatory marker proﬁle and limited sample size, we were unable to
draw a deﬁnite conclusion on the mechanistic pathway underlying the
protective effect of low TLR2 methylation status and high ﬂavonoid
intake. Future studies are warranted to identify the precise
pathophysiologJournal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

17

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 9. Correlation Between Mean Blood TLR2 Methylation and Plasma
Inﬂammatory Markers TLR2 Methylation Position 1

Position 2

Position 3

Position 4

Position 5

Correlation Coefﬁcient

P Value*

Correlation Coefﬁcient

P Value*

Correlation Coefﬁcient

P Value*

Correlation Coefﬁcient

P Value*

Correlation Coefﬁcient

P Value*

IL-6

0.067

0.08

0.025

0.52

0.067

0.08

0.040

0.30

0.020

0.60

IL-8

0.004

0.93

0.006

0.88

0.095

0.01

0.053

0.17

0.049

0.20

IL-1b

0.031

0.42

0.040

0.31

0.046

0.23

0.019

0.63

0.015

0.70

TNF-a

0.043

0.27

0.056

0.15

0.006

0.87

0.009

0.81

0.039

0.32

TNFc

0.030

0.44

0.007

0.86

0.017

0.66

0.029

0.45

0.022

0.58

CRP

0.032

0.35

0.007

0.85

0.011

0.76

0.024

0.49

0.047

0.17

ICAM-1

0.138

<0.0001

0.159

<0.0001

0.127

0.0002

0.123

0.0004

0.124

0.0003

VEGF

0.022

0.57

0.016

0.68

0.091

0.02

0.050

0.20

0.046

0.24

CRP indicates C-reactive protein; ICAM-1, intercellular adhesion
molecule 1; IL, interleukin; TLR2, Toll-like receptor 2; TNF, tumor
necrosis factor; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. *P value
represents Prob>|r| under H0: q (Spearman's rank correlation
coefﬁcient)=0.

ical processes of PM-induced cardiovascular responses, as well as the
mechanistic underpinnings of the effect of TLR2 methylation and dietary
ﬂavonoid intake. The United States is an aging society, and older people
are especially susceptible to air pollution--triggered cardiovascular
disease. As air pollution remains an important ubiquitous public health
threat, PM2.5-associated HRV reduction is an alarming signal of
inﬂuences on the autonomic regulation of heart rate in older people.
These alterations may represent a primary sentinel effect to identify
the inﬂuence of PM2.5 among older individuals or even reﬂect
intermediate mechanisms that may favor acute cardiovascular events.2,3
Providing preventive strategies at the individual level is especially
important in cardiovascular research, which was recognized as an
important new emphasis in the American Heart Association statement on
air pollution.2 Our study provides a novel perspective on individual
susceptibility to adverse

cardiovascular effects following short-term air pollution; our ﬁndings
suggest high TLR2 methylation as a modiﬁable “epigenetic predisposition”
for cardiovascular responses that are associated with short-term PM2.5
exposure in older people. In addition, based on our data, increasing
ﬂavonoid intake---which could be achieved by increasing intake of 1 or
more of the major sources of dietary ﬂavonoids (tea, beans, wine,
berries, and citrus fruits)---may help maintain a low TLR2 methylation
level and mitigate PM2.5 exposure-induced cardiovascular system
impairment. In summary, our ﬁndings suggest that the epigenetic
regulation of TLR2-related immunity may determine vulnerability of older
individuals when confronted with air pollution peaks, and that adequate
dietary ﬂavonoid intake may ensure a protective epigenetic status
against the adverse effects of PM2.5 exposure.

Sources of Funding Table 10. Correlation Between Mean Blood TLR2
Methylation Level and Proportions of Different Leukocyte Cell Types
Spearman Correlation With Mean TLR2 Methylation* Cell Type (%)

Correlation Coefﬁcient

P Value†

Eosinophils

0.051

0.145

Lymphocytes

0.121

0.001

Neutrophils

0.118

0.001

Monocytes

0.018

0.604

Basophils

0.012

0.730

TLR2 indicates Toll-like receptor 2. *Mean TLR2 methylation level across
5 CpG sites. † P value represents Prob>|r| under H0: q (Spearman's rank
correlation coefﬁcient)=0.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

This study was supported by NIH grants R01ES015172, R21ES021895,
R01ES021733, R01ES021357, and P30ES000002; and U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency funding (RD-83479801). The VA Normative Aging Study is
supported by the Cooperative Studies Program/Epidemiology Research and
Information Center of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and is a
component of the Massachusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and
Information Center, Boston, Massachusetts. David Sparrow was supported
by a VA Research Career Scientist award.

Disclosures None. Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

18

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

% Change§, Original Model, N=500*

% Change§, Adjusted for Cell Types, N=498†

1

0.05

0.03

2

0.17

0.26

3

0.53

0.60

4

0.36

0.44

Position

HR

References 1. World Health Organization. Burden of Disease From Ambient
Air Pollution for 2012---Summary of Results. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO;
2014. 2. Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA III, Brook JR, Bhatnagar A,
Diez-Roux AV, Holguin F, Hong Y, Luepker RV, Mittleman MA, Peters A,
Siscovick D, Smith SC Jr, Whitsel L, Kaufman JD; American Heart
Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on the
Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease, and Council on Nutrition, Physical
Activity & Metabolism. Particulate matter air pollution and
cardiovascular disease: an update to the scientiﬁc statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2010;121:2331-- 2378. 3.
Baccarelli A, Cassano PA, Litonjua A, Park SK, Suh H, Sparrow D, Vokonas
P, Schwartz J. Cardiac autonomic dysfunction: effects from particulate
air pollution and protection by dietary methyl nutrients and metabolic
polymorphisms. Circulation. 2008;117:1802--1809.

0.83

0.85‡

4. Ren C, Baccarelli A, Wilker E, Suh H, Sparrow D, Vokonas P, Wright R,
   Schwartz J. Lipid and endothelium-related genes, ambient particulate
   matter, and heart rate variability---the VA Normative Aging Study. J
   Epidemiol Community Health. 2010;64:49--56.

1

10.07‡

9.64‡

2

5.60‡

6.10‡

5. Pope CA III, Verrier RL, Lovett EG, Larson AC, Raizenne ME, Kanner
   RE, Schwartz J, Villegas GM, Gold DR, Dockery DW. Heart rate
   variability associated with particulate air pollution. Am Heart J.
   1999;138:890--899.

3

7.35‡

7.45‡

4

6.55‡

6.48‡

‡

8.29

7.88‡

1

5.34‡

5.01‡

2

0.34

0.72

5

‡

rMSSD

5

6. Stein PK, Barzilay JI, Chaves PH, Mistretta SQ, Domitrovich PP,
   Gottdiener JS, Rich MW, Kleiger RE. Novel measures of heart rate
   variability predict cardiovascular mortality in older adults
   independent of traditional cardiovascular risk factors: the
   Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS). J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.
   2008;19:1169--1174.
7. Brunekreef B, Holgate ST. Air pollution and health. Lancet.
   2002;360:1233--
8. 

SDNN

‡

3

3.87

3.97‡

4

1.62

1.56

9.  Schins RP, Lightbody JH, Borm PJ, Shi T, Donaldson K, Stone V.
    Inﬂammatory effects of coarse and ﬁne particulate matter in relation
    to chemical and biological constituents. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol.
    2004;195:1--11.
10. Zeka A, Sullivan JR, Vokonas PS, Sparrow D, Schwartz J. Inﬂammatory
    markers and particulate air pollution: characterizing the pathway to
    disease. Int J Epidemiol. 2006;35:1347--1354.

4.58

4.21‡

1

2.45

1.65

2

1.75

1.39

3

8.77‡

8.90‡

4

1.22

1.23

5

7.09

6.46

13. Wang X, Zhou S, Chi Y, Wen X, Hoellwarth J, He L, Liu F, Wu C, Dhesi
    S, Zhao J, Hu W, Su C. CD4+CD25+ Treg induction by an HSP60-derived
    peptide SJMHE1 from Schistosoma japonicum is TLR2 dependent. Eur J
    Immunol. 2009;39:3052--3065.

8.72

14. Netea MG, Sutmuller R, Hermann C, Van der Graaf CA, Van der Meer JW,
    van Krieken JH, Hartung T, Adema G, Kullberg BJ. Toll-like receptor
    2 suppresses immunity against Candida albicans through induction of
    IL-10 and regulatory T cells. J Immunol. 2004;172:3712--3718.

5

‡

8. Stone PH, Godleski JJ. First steps toward understanding the
   pathophysiologic link between air pollution and cardiac mortality. Am
   Heart J. 1999;138:804--
9. 

LF

11. Akira S, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O. Pathogen recognition and innate
    immunity. Cell. 2006;124:783--801.
12. Becker S, Fenton MJ, Soukup JM. Involvement of microbial components
    and toll-like receptors 2 and 4 in cytokine responses to air
    pollution particles. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2002;27:611--618.

HF 1

9.72

2

5.31

6.35 ‡

‡

15. Furuta T, Shuto T, Shimasaki S, Ohira Y, Suico MA, Gruenert DC, Kai
    H. DNA demethylation-dependent enhancement of toll-like receptor-2
    gene expression in cystic ﬁbrosis epithelial cells involves
    SP1-activated transcription. BMC Mol Biol. 2008;9:39.
16. Lim U, Song MA. Dietary and lifestyle factors of DNA methylation.
    Methods Mol Biol. 2012;863:359--376.

3

11.01

4

7.63

7.74

5

14.20‡

13.33‡

11.31

HF indicates high-frequency power (0.15 to 0.4 Hz); HR, heart rate; HRV,
heart rate variability; LF, low-frequency power (0.04 to 0.15 Hz);
PM2.5, particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter <2.5 lm; rMSSD, root
mean square of successive differences; SDNN, standard deviation of
normal-to-normal intervals; TLR2, Toll-like receptor 2. *Results were
adjusted for age, body mass index, fasting glucose level, hypertension,
smoking status, alcohol consumption, physical exercise, household
income, medication use (b-blocker, calcium channel blocker,
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor), room temperature, outdoor
apparent temperature, season, weekday, and visit date. † Results were
adjusted for all covariates in the original model and the percentage of
neutrophil and lymphocyte. ‡ P≤0.05, statistically signiﬁcant. § The
additional percent change in HRV associated with 10 lg/m3 increase in
PM2.5 concentration, compared to participants with one %5mC lower TLR2
methylation level.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

17. Fang MZ, Wang Y, Ai N, Hou Z, Sun Y, Lu H, Welsh W, Yang CS. Tea
    polyphenol ()-epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits DNA
    methyltransferase and reactivates methylation-silenced genes in
    cancer cell lines. Cancer Res. 2003;63:7563--
18. 
19. Fang M, Chen D, Yang CS. Dietary polyphenols may affect DNA
    methylation. J Nutr. 2007;137:223S--228S.
20. Lillycrop KA, Phillips ES, Jackson AA, Hanson MA, Burdge GC. Dietary
    protein restriction of pregnant rats induces and folic acid
    supplementation prevents epigenetic modiﬁcation of hepatic gene
    expression in the offspring. J Nutr. 2005;135:1382--1386.
21. Bind MA, Baccarelli A, Zanobetti A, Tarantini L, Suh H, Vokonas P,
    Schwartz J. Air pollution and markers of coagulation, inﬂammation,
    and endothelial function: associations and epigene-environment
    interactions in an elderly cohort. Epidemiology. 2012;23:332--340.

Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

19

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 11. Effect Modiﬁcation by Position-Speciﬁc TLR2 Methylation Level
on the Association Between PM2.5 Exposure and HRV, Adjusted for Cell
Types

Air Pollution, Diet, and Heart Rate Variability

Zhong et al

22. Baccarelli A, Tarantini L, Wright RO, Bollati V, Litonjua AA,
    Zanobetti A, Sparrow D, Vokonas P, Schwartz J. Repetitive element
    DNA methylation and circulating endothelial and inﬂammation markers
    in the VA Normative Aging Study. Epigenetics. 2010;5:222--228.
23. Fang SC, Mehta AJ, Alexeeff SE, Gryparis A, Coull B, Vokonas P,
    Christiani D, Schwartz J. Residential black carbon exposure and
    circulating markers of systemic inﬂammation in elderly males: the
    Normative Aging Study. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120:674--680.
24. Kloog I, Chudnovsky A, Koutrakis P, Schwartz J. Temporal and spatial
    assessments of minimum air temperature using satellite surface
    temperature measurements in Massachusetts, USA. Sci Total Environ.
    2012;432:85--92.
25. Madrigano J, Kloog I, Goldberg R, Coull BA, Mittleman MA, Schwartz
    J. Longterm exposure to PM2.5 and incidence of acute myocardial
    infarction. Environ Health Perspect. 2013;121:192--196.
26. Kloog I, Ridgway B, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Schwartz JD. Long- and
    short-term exposure to PM2.5 and mortality: using novel exposure
    models. Epidemiology. 2013;24:555--561.
27. Yanosky JD, Paciorek CJ, Suh HH. Predicting chronic ﬁne and coarse
    particulate exposures using spatiotemporal models for the
    northeastern and midwestern United States. Environ Health Perspect.
    2009;117:522--
28. 
29. Kloog I, Nordio F, Coull BA, Schwartz J. Incorporating local land
    use regression and satellite aerosol optical depth in a hybrid model
    of spatiotemporal PM2.5 exposures in the mid-Atlantic states.
    Environ Sci Technol. 2012;46:11913--
30. 
31. Kloog I, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Lee HJ, Schwartz J. Assessing
    temporally and spatially resolved PM2.5 exposures for
    epidemiological studies using satellite aerosol optical depth
    measurements. Atmos Environ. 2011;45: 6267--6275.
32. Park SK, O'Neill MS, Vokonas PS, Sparrow D, Schwartz J. Effects of
    air pollution on heart rate variability: the VA Normative Aging
    Study. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:304--309.
33. Willett WC, Sampson L, Stampfer MJ, Rosner B, Bain C, Witschi J,
    Hennekens CH, Speizer FE. Reproducibility and validity of a
    semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire. Am J Epidemiol.
    1985;122:51--65.
34. Rimm EB, Giovannucci EL, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Litin LB, Willett
    WC. Reproducibility and validity of an expanded self-administered
    semiquantitative

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423

food frequency questionnaire among male health professionals. Am J
Epidemiol. 1992;135:1114--1126; discussion 1127--1136. 33. Cassidy A,
O'Reilly EJ, Kay C, Sampson L, Franz M, Forman JP, Curhan G, Rimm EB.
Habitual intake of ﬂavonoid subclasses and incident hypertension in
adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;93:338--347. 34. Bhagwat SA, Haytowitz DB,
Prior RL, Gu L, Hammerstone J, Gebhardt SE. USDA Database for
Proanthocyanidin Content of Selected Foods. 2004.
http://www.ars.usda.gov/SP2UserFiles/Place/80400525/Data/PA/PA.pdf 35.
Bhagwat SA, Gebhardt SE, Haytowitz DB, Holden JM, Harnly JM. USDA
Database for the Flavonoid Content of Selected Foods. Release 2.1. 2007.
http://
www.ars.usda.gov/SP2UserFiles/Place/80400525/Data/Flav/Flav02-1.pdf 36.
Cowley AW Jr, Nadeau JH, Baccarelli A, Berecek K, Fornage M, Gibbons GH,
Harrison DG, Liang M, Nathanielsz PW, O'Connor DT, Ordovas J, Peng W,
Soares MB, Szyf M, Tolunay HE, Wood KC, Zhao K, Galis ZS. Report of the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute working group on epigenetics
and hypertension. Hypertension. 2012;59:899--905. 37. Min KB, Min JY,
Cho SI, Paek D. The relationship between air pollutants and heart-rate
variability among community residents in Korea. Inhal Toxicol.
2008;20:435--444. 38. Chuang KJ, Chan CC, Chen NT, Su TC, Lin LY.
Effects of particle size fractions on reducing heart rate variability in
cardiac and hypertensive patients. Environ Health Perspect.
2005;113:1693--1697. 39. Power KL, Balmes J, Solomon C. Controlled
exposure to combined particles and ozone decreases heart rate
variability. J Occup Environ Med. 2008;50:1253--1260. 40. Chuang KJ,
Chan CC, Su TC, Lee CT, Tang CS. The effect of urban air pollution on
inﬂammation, oxidative stress, coagulation, and autonomic dysfunction in
young adults. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007;176:370--376. 41. Pieters
N, Plusquin M, Cox B, Kicinski M, Vangronsveld J, Nawrot TS. An
epidemiological appraisal of the association between heart rate
variability and particulate air pollution: a meta-analysis. Heart.
2012;98:1127--1135. 42. Alegria-Torres JA, Baccarelli A, Bollati V.
Epigenetics and lifestyle. Epigenomics. 2011;3:267--277. 43. Lee WJ,
Shim JY, Zhu BT. Mechanisms for the inhibition of DNA methyltransferases
by tea catechins and bioﬂavonoids. Mol Pharmacol. 2005;68:1018-- 1030.
44. Crider KS, Yang TP, Berry RJ, Bailey LB. Folate and DNA methylation:
a review of molecular mechanisms and the evidence for folate's role. Adv
Nutr. 2012;3:21--38. 45. Zeger SL, Thomas D, Dominici F, Samet JM,
Schwartz J, Dockery D, Cohen A. Exposure measurement error in
time-series studies of air pollution: concepts and consequences. Environ
Health Perspect. 2000;108:419--426.

Journal of the American Heart Association

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015

20

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

21. Camm AJ, Malik M, Bigger JT, Breithardt G, Cerutti S, Cohen RJ,
    Coumel P, Fallen EL, Kennedy HL, Kleiger RE, Lombardi F, Malliani A,
    Moss AJ, Rottman JN, Schmidt G, Schwartz PJ, Singer DH. Heart rate
    variability: standards of measurement, physiological interpretation
    and clinical use. Task force of the European Society of Cardiology
    and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology.
    Circulation. 1996;93:1043--1065.

Cardiac Autonomic Dysfunction: Particulate Air Pollution Effects Are
Modulated by Epigenetic Immunoregulation of Toll−like Receptor 2 and
Dietary Flavonoid Intake Jia Zhong, Elena Colicino, Xinyi Lin, Amar
Mehta, Itai Kloog, Antonella Zanobetti, Hyang-Min Byun, Marie-Abèle
Bind, Laura Cantone, Diddier Prada, Letizia Tarantini, Letizia Trevisi,
David Sparrow, Pantel Vokonas, Joel Schwartz and Andrea A. Baccarelli J
Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e001423; originally published January 27, 2015;
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001423 The Journal of the American Heart
Association is published by the American Heart Association, 7272
Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231 Online ISSN: 2047-9980

The online version of this article, along with updated information and
services, is located on the World Wide Web at:
http://jaha.ahajournals.org/content/4/1/e001423

Subscriptions, Permissions, and Reprints: The Journal of the American
Heart Association is an online only Open Access publication. Visit the
Journal at http://jaha.ahajournals.org for more information.

Downloaded from http://jaha.ahajournals.org/ at Malmad Medical Libraries
Consortium on February 24, 2015


