#+TITLE: spatial\_stats

* spatial statstics

** intro

[[spatial_stats_files/attach/spatial_analysis.pdf][Attachment #01
(spatial\_analysis.pdf)]]

** spatial regression

*Spatial regression decision process
*
  Begin the process at the top of the graph and consider the standard
(i.e.,
 not the robust forms) LM-Error and LM-Lag test statistics. If neither
rejects
 the null hypothesis, stick with the OLS results. It is likely that in
this case,
 the Moran's I test statistic will not reject the null hypothesis either
 If oneof the LM test statistics rejects the null hypothesis, and the
other does not,
 then the decision is straightforward as well: estimate the alternative
spatial
 regression model that matches the test statistic that rejects the null.
So,
 if LM-Error rejects the null, but LM-lag does not, estimate a spatial
error
 model, and vice versa.
 When both LM test statistics reject the null hypothesis, proceed to the
 bottom part of the graph and consider the Robust forms of the test
statistics.
 Typically, only one of them will be signiﬁcant (as in the below
Figure), or on
 will be orders of magnitude more signiﬁcant than the other (e.g., p <
0.00000
 compared to p < 0.03). In that case, the decision is simple: estimate
the
 spatial regression model matching the (most) signiﬁcant statistic. In
the
 rare instance that both would be highly signiﬁcant, go with the model
with
 the largest value for the test statistic. However, in this situation,
some
 caution is needed, since there may be other sources of misspeciﬁcation.
One
 obvious action to take is to consider the results for diﬀerent spatial
weights
 and/or to change the basic (i.e., not the spatial part) speciﬁcation of
the
 model. As shown in the Figure, there are also rare instances where
neither
 of the Robust LM test statistics are signiﬁcant. In those cases, more
serious
 misspeciﬁcation problems are likely present and those should be
addressed
 ﬁrst.

** morans i

*Intro
*
 In statistics, Moran's I is a measure of spatial autocorrelation
developed by Patrick A.P. Moran.
 Like autocorrelation, spatial autocorrelation means that adjacent
observations of the same phenomenon are correlated. However,
autocorrelation is about proximity in time. Spatial autocorrelation is
about proximity in (two-dimensional) space. Spatial autocorrelation is
more complex than autocorrelation because the correlation is
two-dimensional and bi-directional.
 Negative (positive) values indicate negative (positive) spatial
autocorrelation. Values range from −1 (indicating perfect dispersion) to
+1 (perfect correlation). A zero values indicates a random spatial
pattern.
 For statistical hypothesis testing, Moran's I values can be transformed
to Z-scores in which values greater than 1.96 or smaller than −1.96
indicate spatial autocorrelation that is significant at the 5% level.
 [[spatial_stats_files/img/image.png]]
 The Value field is whats reported in the tabels for manuscripts
 Moran's I is inversely related to Geary's C, but it is not identical.
Moran's I is a measure of global spatial autocorrelation, while Geary's
C is more sensitive to local spatial autocorrelation*.moran I index*
 if the MI value is below 0.03 its not significant

** maup-aggregation

*Modifiable areal unit problem              *
 The *modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP)* is a source of statistical
bias that can radically affect the results of statistical hypothesis
tests. MAUP can cause the correlation, or association, between two
variables to range from -0.99 to +0.99. MAUP occurs when point-based
measures of spatial phenomena (e.g., population density) are aggregated
into districts, the resulting summary values (e.g., totals, rates,
proportions) are influenced by the choice of district boundaries. For
example, census data may be aggregated into census enumeration
districts, or postcode areas, or police precincts, or any other spatial
partition (thus, the 'areal units' are 'modifiable'). Variation in the
spatial units used for aggregation causes variation in statistical
results.
  
 The issue was discovered in 1934. The term MAUP was first coined and
described in detail by Openshaw (1984), who lamented that "the areal
units (zonal objects) used in many geographical studies are arbitrary,
modifiable, and subject to the whims and fancies of whoever is doing, or
did, the aggregating." (Openshaw, 1984, p.3). The problem is especially
crucial when the aggregate data are used for
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cluster][cluster]] analysis for spatial
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epidemiology][epidemiology]],
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spatial_statistics][spatial statistics]]
or [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choropleth_map][choropleth mapping]],
in which misinterpretations can easily be made without realizing it.
Many fields of science, especially
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_geography][human geography]] are
prone to disregard the MAUP when drawing inferences from statistics
based on aggregated data. MAUP is closely related to the topic of
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_fallacy][ecological fallacy]]
and ecological bias.
  
 Ecological bias caused by MAUP has been documented as two separate
effects that usually occur simultaneously during the analysis of
aggregated data. The scale effect causes variation in statistical
results between different levels of aggregation. Therefore, association
between variables depends on the size of areal units for which data are
reported. Generally, correlation increases as areal unit size increases.
The zone effect describes variation in correlation statistics caused by
the regrouping of data into different configurations at the same scale.
  
 Research since the 1930's has found extra variation in statistical
results because of MAUP. The standard methods of calculating
within-group and between-group variance do not account for the extra
variance seen in MAUP studies as the groupings change. MAUP can be used
as a methodology to calculate upper and lower limits as well as average
regression parameters for multiple sets of spatial groupings.
  
 Several suggestions have been made in the literature to reduce
aggregation bias during
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regression_analysis][regression
analysis]]. A researcher might correct the variance-covariance matrix
using samples from individual-level data (Holt et al., 1996).
Alternatively, one might focus on local spatial regression rather than
global regression. Alternatively, a researcher might attempt to design
areal units to maximize a particular statistical result (Openshaw,
1984). Others have argued that it may be difficult to construct a single
set of optimal aggregation units for multiple variables, each of which
may exhibit non-stationarity and spatial autocorrelation across space in
different ways. Others have suggested developing statistics that change
across scales in a predictable way, perhaps using the fractal dimension
as a scale independent measure of spatial relationships. Others have
suggested Bayesian hierarchical models as a general methodology for
combining aggregated and individual-level data for ecological inference.
  
 Studies of the MAUP based on empirical data can only provide limited
insight due to an inability to control relationships between multiple
spatial variables. Data simulation is necessary to have control over
various properties of individual level data. Simulation studies such as
those by Swift et al. (2008) have demonstrated that the spatial support
of variables can effect the magnitude of ecological bias caused by
spatial data aggregation.
  
 MAUP sensitivity analysis
 Using simulations for univariate data, Larsen (2000) advocated the use
of a Variance Ratio to investigate the effect of spatial configuration,
spatial association and data aggregation. A detailed description of
variation of statistics due to MAUP is presented by Reynolds, H. (1998).
Reynold's research demonstrates the importance of the spatial
arrangement and spatial autocorrelation of data values. Reynold's
simulation experiments were expanded by Swift, A. (2009). A series of
nine exercises begins with simulated regression analysis and a spatial
trend, then focuses on the topic of MAUP in the context of
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spatial_epidemiology][spatial
epidemiology]]. A method of MAUP sensitivity analysis is presented that
demonstrates MAUP is not entirely a problem. MAUP can be used as an
analytical tool to help understand spatial heterogeneity and
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spatial_autocorrelation][spatial
autocorrelation]].
  
 This topic is of particular importance because (in some cases) data
aggregation can obscure strong a
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Correlation][correlation]] between
variables, making the relationship appear weak or even negative.
Conversely, MAUP can cause random variables to appear as if there is a
significant association, when there is not. Multivariate regression
parameters are more sensitive to MAUP than correlation coefficients.
Until a more analytical solution to MAUP is available, spatial
sensitivity analysis using a variety of areal units is recommended as a
methodology to estimate uncertainty of correlation and regression
coefficients due to ecological bias.
  
 References

-  Openshaw, S. (1984). /The Modifiable Areal Unit Problem./ Norwich:
   Geo Books.
   [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/0860941345][ISBN
   0-86094-134-5]].
-  Holt D, Steel D, Tranmer M, Wrigley N. (1996). "Aggregation and
   ecological effects in geographically based data." "Geographical
   Analysis" 28:244{261.
-  Unwin, D. J. (1996). "GIS, spatial analysis and spatial statistics."
   /Progress in Human Geography./ *20*: 540-551.
-  Cressie, N. (1996). "Change of Support and the Modifiable Areal Unit
   Problem." “Geographical Systems“, 3:159-180.
-  Reynolds, H. (1998). "The Modifiable Area Unit Problem: Empirical
   Analysis By Statistical Simulation." PhD thesis, Department of
   Geography University of Toronto,
   [[http://www.badpets.net/Thesis][http://www.badpets.net/Thesis]]
-  Larsen, J. (2000). "The Modifiable Areal Unit Problem: A problem or a
   source of spatial information?" PhD thesis, Ohio State University.
-  Swift, A., Liu, L., and Uber, J. (2008) "Reducing MAUP bias of
   correlation statistics between water quality and GI illness."
   Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 32, 134--148
-  Swift, A. (2009). "MAUP Exercises for GIS and Medical Geography."
   [[http://www.current.net/andresswift/][http://www.current.net/andresswift/]]

** ecological fallacy

[[spatial_stats_files/attach/ecological_fallacy.pdf][Attachment #02
(ecological\_fallacy.pdf)]]
