#+TITLE: spss

* spss

** Spss Course

*** PhD spps short summary

[[spss_files/attach/part3-spss.doc][Attachment #01 (part3-spss.doc)]]

** Data input

*** does not equal sign spss

does not equal sign spss is:
 ~=

*** add cases by day to a file

if you have a file with multiple cases for each day and you want to add
a mean value to all cases for that day use the merge function:
 [[spss_files/img/image.png]]
 make sure you put the key variable (date2) in the key variable window
and matach case using the NON-active dataset as a key table

*** system missing

there is a menu in the sas dialog to deal with missing
 [[spss_files/img/SS-2011-09-27_15.06.41.png]]
 then you can use a missing command where missing=1 would indicate to
choose missing

*** shift values

[[spss_files/img/SS-2011-09-27_15.15.44.png]]
 you can use shift values to move cases up (lead) or down (lag) based on
the prev following cells

*** convert string to numeric

recode score (convert) into score2.
 execute.

** Data manegment

*** aggregate to calculate daily mean

to calulate a mean value by date for a specific variable use the
aggregate function in spss:
 [[spss_files/img/Image_8GN0qsPKOXWy-tfPRWm.lw_0001.png]]

*** quickly extract year.month.day from a date variable

 * Date and Time Wizard: c.
 COMPUTE c=XDATE.YEAR(date).
 VARIABLE LABELS c "c".
 VARIABLE LEVEL c(SCALE).
 FORMATS c(F8.0).
 VARIABLE WIDTH c(8).
 EXECUTE.
 * Date and Time Wizard: m.
 COMPUTE m=XDATE.MONTH(date).
 VARIABLE LABELS m "m".
 VARIABLE LEVEL m(SCALE).
 FORMATS m(F8.0).
 VARIABLE WIDTH m(8).
 EXECUTE.
 * Date and Time Wizard: d.
 COMPUTE d=XDATE.MDAY(date).
 VARIABLE LABELS d "d".
 VARIABLE LEVEL d(SCALE).
 FORMATS d(F8.0).
 VARIABLE WIDTH d(8).
 EXECUTE.
  

*** converte F to celsius

use :
 (temp-32) * 5 / 9
 [[spss_files/img/SS-2010-10-18_12.16.15.jpg]]

*** convert between numeric variables and string variables

*In SPSS, how do I convert between numeric variables and string
variables?*
 In SPSS, to convert a numeric variable to a string variable, use the
STRING() function.
 Since the default variable type in SPSS is numeric, you need to define
your string variable in advance.
 Consider the following example:
  STRING str (A8).
   COMPUTE str = STRING(num, F2.0).
   EXECUTE.
 In the example above, A8 indicates a string variable eight characters
long,
 and F2.0 is the format of output values of variable num.
 For example, F8.4 fills four zeros after the decimal point when the
numeric variable num is an integer.
 To convert a string variable to a numeric variable num, use the
NUMBER() function, for example:
 COMPUTE num = NUMBER(str, F8.2).
   EXECUTE.

*** select string charecters

to select string characters use the '' IE:
 pollutant\_ = 'PM25-FIL' OR pollutant\_ = 'PM25-PRI' OR pollutant\_ =
'PM10-PRI' OR pollutant\_= 'PM10-FIL' OR pollutant\_ = 'PM-CON'

** concentrate (combine) text (string) into 1 variable

use the syntaxt to combine a few variables to one for example:
 STRING id (A20).
 COMPUTE id = CONCAT(RTRIM(state), LTRIM(county), LTRIM(site)).
 execute.
 where:
 id :new variable name
 A20: is the width of the variable
 Concat is the concentrate command, Rtrim/Ltrim is used to trim empty
spaces left or right and the orig variables are marked in blue

** Rename Variables in spss

Rename Variables in spss
 issue this command in syntax:
 RENAME VARIABLE (varx = vara).

** drop all missing cases from the current SPSS data set

drop all missing cases from the current SPSS data set issue:
 ELECT IF NOT (SYSMIS(amount)).
   SAVE OUTFILE= 'newfile.sav'.
 This example drops all cases whose value of the variable amount is
missing, and then saves this data to an SPSS system file called

** Statistics

*** Regression

**** Logistic regression

***** Using the Logit Model

Before running logit, check to see if any cells (created by the crosstab
of our categorical and IV's) are empty or particularly small.  If this
occurs, there may be difficulty running the logit model. 
 Coding is very important here!!!!!!!!!!
 if your variables are not coded properly , use recode to fix that:
 [[spss_files/img/logistic09.gif]]
 as a general rule of thumb use "0" for no and "1" for yes
 SPSS will create an indicator variable for you if you click on the
CATEGORICAL button in the logistic regression dialog box:
 [[spss_files/img/Pasted.jpg]]
 Then you must define the reference category:
 [[spss_files/img/Image_Sn9Xk78tG-G2tQGjAWqb5g_0001.jpg]]
 (last means last alphabetically)!
 If you select *LAST* as the reference category, SPSS will use the code
0=male, 1=female
 If you select *FIRST* as the reference category, SPSS will use the code
0=female, 1=male.
 example:
 if you choose *first*:
 [[spss_files/img/Image_Sn9Xk78tG-G2tQGjAWqb5g_0002.jpg]]
 will result in this:
 [[spss_files/img/Image_Sn9Xk78tG-G2tQGjAWqb5g_0003.jpg]]
 if you choose La

***** spss output

Below is important information in the logistic output:
 1) This shows the number of observations and the coding for the DV
(cases-BC patients and controls)
 [[spss_files/img/Image_g70jlwWZqh23wNvJRqQ0ow_0001.jpg]]
 2) The Block 0 output is for a model that includes only the intercept
(which PASW calls the constant).
 3)Block 1 :
 The likelihood ratio chi-square tells us weather our model as a whole
fits significantly better than the empty model (Model 0). The -2 log
likelihood is used to to compare the fit of this model with Model 0. 
 the R Square values shown might appear to be just like those you get
with OLS, but these are forms of "pseudo" R square values which can vary
considerably depending on the measure you select.
 4)Variables in the equation
 [[spss_files/img/Image_g70jlwWZqh23wNvJRqQ0ow_0002.jpg]]
 The above table gets into the heart of the results. It shows the
coefficients (B), their standard errors, the Wald Chi-Square statistic,
associated p-values, and odds ratio (Exp(B)). 
 The interpretation of the coefficients can be awkward, so many
researchers prefer to exponentiate (Exp(B)) the coefficients and
interpret them as odds-ratios
 So we can say that for a one unit increase in BR light, the odds of
being a cancer patient (cases) (versus not being a cancer
patient-control group) increased by a factor of 1.278
