#+TITLE: GHP534

* GHP534

** course methods

*** class 1

sylabus, papers etc
 go over names and department and thesis info etc
 presentation on intro to GIS

** 21.3

[[GHP534_files/attach/1-Intro.pdf][Attachment #01 (1-Intro.pdf)]]
 gis is taking spatial data and mapping them and allowing to do spatial
maipulations
 spatial analysis is using stat methods to test hypothesis about
relationships in space
 DEM-digital elevation model-sptial resolution of 90m- get from usgs
 there is a model in arcgis that models slopes. you dl dem and you run a
model in gis that calculates the slope (its in spatial analyst)
 you can constrain creation of voronoi polygons by river and roads to
get a better creation of these thiessan polygons

** 23.3

[[GHP534_files/attach/2-visualization.pdf][Attachment #02
(2-visualization.pdf)]]
 you cant compare crude rates it creates a biased map.
 to compare area/states/counties/etc on a map it needs to be age
adjusted
 ESDA:
 -global tells you if there is a spatial pattern in your data
 -local tells you if there is a pattern and *where
*For kernel smoothing you can either use the distance between the points
or an attribute in the data
 when u use kernel smoothing for vizualization it dosent say there are
hotspots/clusters but let you learn about the data which shows you if
you need to run some specific spatial stat tests

** 28.3

[[GHP534_files/attach/3-autocorr.pdf][Attachment #03 (3-autocorr.pdf)]]
 spatial hetrogeneity-deals with distributions
 spatial dependence/spatial auocorrelation- deals with covariances, how
one observation is correlated to another in space
 if you have hetrogeneity you have a trend in the data!
 spatial dependence-we expect points that are close to each other to be
more correlated then farther points.
 both hetrogenaoty and spatial dependnce can create clusters
 most often you dont need to sperate the effects. you need to see which
effect is occuring and then analyze the effects
 we always use tests that look to reject the H0 -thats is that there is
SCR- complete spatial randmomness
 so that if we reject H0 ten there is spatial auto correlation
 using Queens case, adjacent units sharing a border are considered 1st
order neighbourhood in the weight matrix, the 2nd tier (by distnace) are
2nd order that are adjecnt to the 1st order etc..
 'neihbors; can be defined in many ways not just border (adjacnacey) but
by distance etc..which one to use depends on the data
 *global test* check weathere there is spatial autocorrelation in data
 *local test-*anwers the same above global test question but also tells
you where in your location the effect is (show you)
 morans I is going to tell you if you have positive or negative auto
correlation.
 morans I rearanges the data and puts it in a normal distribution. if
the data falls in the tails its a rare event and then there is spatial
autocorrelation.
 +1 shows positive SAC
 0 shows now SAC at all
 -1 Strong negetive SAC
 significance is determined by Z-score similar to normal Z-score in
statistics- 1.96 is a 5% significant values
 morans I is the slope of the curve of the results of your variable in
what happens in its neighbors, the higher the slope the higher the
correlation
 Gearys C is also a SAC test but instead of covariences it looks at
diffrences
 ranges betwwen 0-2 and shoes positive and negative SAC
 G(d) statistic is also for SAC looking at the distance. it dosent tell
just tell positive/negative SAC but tells you of clustering
 not finding a global SAC does not mean there is a local SAC, so if the
global one is not significant you should still check the local auto
correlation
 you start the test with global and then move to local!
 [[GHP534_files/img/Pasted.jpg]]
 *order type:*
 [[GHP534_files/img/Image_KHs3aCodNDHn1NXqyEiPUQ_0001.jpg]]
 [[GHP534_files/img/Image_KHs3aCodNDHn1NXqyEiPUQ_0002.jpg]]
 the purple area is where there is SAC while the empty area there is no
SAC

** 30.3

[[GHP534_files/attach/4-PPA.pdf][Attachment #04 (4-PPA.pdf)]]
 *LISA*- local indicagtors of spatial auto correlation
 *an area that is significant (low or high) does not mean that the areas
surronding it are significant!*
 we are always looking at clusters of outcomes:
 high-high- high neigbourhood/area surronded by high areas
 high-low- high neigbourhood/area surronded by low areas
 low-low- low neigbourhood/area surronded by low areas
 low-high- low neigbourhood/area surronded by high areas
 gi family does not show you negative or positve association as opposed
to MI. a positive value IE shows high values of SAC not a positive
association.

** 4.4

[[GHP534_files/attach/5-PPA-cluster.pdf][Attachment #05
(5-PPA-cluster.pdf)]]
 k function is a global test
 the k function tells you at what distance your points cluster or
disperst
 it shows that in a graph. if the observed is above or below the min/max
lines it shoes clustering (above maximum) or disperution (below min)
 using statscan you can check space-time scans. to check clusterning
over time as well
    

** 6.4 (kulldorff)

[[GHP534_files/attach/early-HSPH2011.ppt][Attachment #06
(early-HSPH2011.ppt)]]
 [[GHP534_files/attach/scan-HSPH2011.ppt][Attachment #07
(scan-HSPH2011.ppt)]]
 [[GHP534_files/attach/survival-HSPH2011.ppt][Attachment #08
(survival-HSPH2011.ppt)]]

** 11.4

[[GHP534_files/attach/8-dataProbs.pdf][Attachment #09
(8-dataProbs.pdf)]]
 kriiging is spatial estemation:
 based on *points observed* to an *estimated surface
*the variables must be *continous
 points need to be stationary with no directional effect
*if there are directional effects you need to remove them*
 assumptions*:
 the overal average must be the same (the are no trends in the data)
 the varience must be the same
 the covarience between 2 observations only depend on the distance
 krigging uses semivarince
 *h* is always the distance
 we are looking for a curve that best fits the observed data
 slide below shows that as distance increases things should be
dissimmilar (the 1st rule of geopgraphy-things closer are similiar to
each other)
 [[GHP534_files/img/Image_GiZ58akgyF7LOMYLNyha6g_0001.jpg]]

** 13.4

[[GHP534_files/attach/8-dataProbs.pdf][Attachment #10
(8-dataProbs.pdf)]]
 [[GHP534_files/attach/lecture8.ogg][Attachment #11 (lecture8.ogg)]]
 scale and data limitations:
 sometimes its benefical to run the tests in multiple scales to avoid
MAUP (multi scale analysis)
 you must be extremmly carefull when interpurting the results of the
boundry areas
 empty ares could be due to not sampling or have been masked for
confindatiality.

** 18.4

with spatial filitering you deal only with the covariates

** 20.4

[[GHP534_files/attach/lecture10.ogg][Attachment #12 (lecture10.ogg)]]
 spatial autoregressive models:
 sptatil lag (SL)
 in spatial lag there is a vector that represents the outcome (DV) on
the right hand side of the quation with a spatial matrix and lag which
gets a cooeficent as well. this is a 'lag' but as opposed to the time
series this lag explains not time but neighbourhoods around.
 spatial error (SE)
 to choose if to run SL or SE you run the lagarange test (LM)
 you run the LM and choose which one is more significant
 if both SL an SE are sig you run the robust LM model (RLM)
 *
 likelihood ratio test for spatial lad dependnce:* the higher the log
likelihood the bettwer the fit
 *AIC:* the lower the AIC the better the fit

** 25.4

in gwr you dont present a table of cooefiencts but a map (for publishing
in papers)
 bandwith means how many neighbours to capture
 a large bandwith with catch more neigbours etc
 the wieghts can be fixed or adaptive, usually its better to use
adaptive
 you have to show on a map the coefficents and a map of significnce (2
maps)
 you can also have a r2 map

** 27.4

types of resolution:
 spatial, temporal, spectral (the band numbers),radiomatric resolution
(semsitvity to magnitude of electromagnetic energy).
