#+TITLE: MA\_stat\_kerenorchen


** Intro

*** general intro to course (summary)


[[file:MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/attach/Stat_intro.pdf][Intro]]

discriptive statistics

*What is the difference between categorical, ordinal and interval
variables?
*
 In talking about variables, sometimes you hear variables being
described as categorical (or sometimes**nominal), or ordinal, or
interval.  Below we will define these terms and explain why they are
important.
  Categorical (nominal)
 A categorical variable (sometimes called a nominal variable) is one
that has two or more categories, but there is no intrinsic ordering to
the categories.  For example, gender is a categorical variable having
two categories (male and female) and there is no intrinsic ordering to
the categories.  Hair color is also a categorical variable having a
number of categories (blonde, brown, brunette, red, etc.) and again,
there is no agreed way to order these from highest to lowest.  A purely
categorical variable is one that simply allows you to assign categories
but you cannot clearly order the variables.  If the variable has a clear
ordering, then that variable would be an ordinal variable, as described
below.
  Ordinal
 An ordinal variable is similar to a categorical variable.  The
difference between the two is that there is a clear ordering of the
variables.  For example, suppose you have a variable, economic status,
with three categories (low, medium and high).  In addition to being able
to classify people into these three categories, you can order the
categories as low, medium and high. Now consider a variable like
educational experience (with values such as elementary school graduate,
high school graduate, some college and college graduate). These also can
be ordered as elementary school, high school, some**college, and college
graduate.  Even though we can order these from lowest to highest, the
spacing between the values may not be the same across the levels of the
variables.  Say we assign scores 1, 2, 3 and 4 to these four levels of
educational experience and we compare the difference in education
between categories one and two with the difference in educational
experience between categories two and three, or the difference between
categories three and four. The difference between categories one and two
(elementary and high school) is probably much bigger than the difference
between categories two and three (high school and some college).  In
this example, we can order the people in level of educational experience
but the size of the difference between categories is inconsistent
(because the spacing between categories one and two is bigger than
categories two and three).  If these categories were equally spaced,
then the variable would be an interval variable.
  Interval (scale)
 An interval variable is similar to an ordinal variable, except that the
intervals between the values of the interval variable are equally
spaced.  For example, suppose you have a variable such as annual income
that is measured in dollars, and we have three people who make $10,000,
$15,000 and $20,000. The second person makes $5,000 more than the first
person and $5,000 less than the third person, and the size of these
intervals  is the same.  If there were two other people who make $90,000
and $95,000, the size of that interval between these two people is also
the same ($5,000). 
 Ratio
 An ratio variable is similar to an interval variable but there is a
meaning for the intervals and there is an absolot Zero(0).
 Why does it matter whether a variable is *categorical*, *ordinal* or
*interval*? 
 Statistical computations and analyses assume that the variables have a
specific levels of measurement.  For example, it would not make sense to
compute an average hair color.  An average of a categorical variable
does not make much sense because there is no intrinsic ordering of the
levels of the categories.  Moreover, if you tried to compute the average
of educational experience as defined in the ordinal section above, you
would also obtain a nonsensical result.  Because the spacing between the
four levels of educational experience is very uneven, the meaning of
this average would be very questionable.  In short, an average requires
a variable to be interval.  Sometimes you have variables that are "in
between" ordinal and interval, for example, a five-point likert scale
with values "strongly agree", "agree", "neutral", "disagree" and
"strongly disagree".  If we cannot be sure that the intervals between
each of these five values are the same, then we would not be able to say
that this is an interval variable, but we would say that it is an
ordinal variable.  However, in order to be able to use statistics that
assume the variable is interval, we will assume that the intervals are
equally spaced.  
  Does it matter if my dependent variable is normally distributed?
 When you are doing a t-test or ANOVA, the assumption is that the
distribution of the sample means are normally distributed.  One way to
guarantee this is for the distribution of the individual observations
from the sample to be normal.  However, even if the distribution of the
individual observations is not normal, the distribution of the sample
means will be normally distributed if your sample size is about 30 or
larger.  This is due to the "central limit theorem" that shows that even
when a population is non-normally distributed, the distribution of the
"sample means" will be normally distributed when the sample size is 30
or more, for example see
[[http://www.ats.ucla.edu/stat/stata/ado/teach/clt.htm][Central limit
theorem demonstration]] .
  
 If you are doing a regression analysis, then the assumption is that
your residuals are normally distributed.  One way to make it very likely
to have normal residuals is to have a dependent variable that is
normally distributed and predictors that are all normally distributed,
however this is not necessary for your residuals to be normally
distributed.   
  
  
  

*** Data types

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Pasted.jpg]]

*** Frequencies

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_JRLCTopF2SJ.r7GLNiyt2w_0001.jpg]]

*** Frequencies part2

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_ciydGqXBOFPGo8xn9HSGVg_0001.jpg]]

** t-test

*** T-test 1

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_hcVwlwg1Fxk7V0DCTecw6w_0001.jpg]]

*** T-test 2

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_bml.ka1I8WaDNcJhWjjYew_0001.jpg]]

*** T-test 3

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_09RxixcyK84xKaKCjWayrQ_0001.jpg]]

** anova

*** Anova 1

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_pgEHkO7hKxp7wvRmgT2O9w_0001.jpg]]

*** Anova 2

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_1xtzthwIw87XjIDAYk3FQQ_0001.jpg]]

** correlations

*** correlations

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_A7OJiEm-Fzb0Dw2IpVESgQ_0001.jpg]]

** crosstabs

*** crosstabs 1

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_kc5TGNbPsdsfXlmlI.fPLw_0001.jpg]]

*** crosstabs 2

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_0iIX57sr.ybC4YkQRKwgDA_0001.jpg]]

** regression

*** Regression example

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_yVP2V7xiU4zW4J.MImH1Dg_0001.jpg]]
 [[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_yVP2V7xiU4zW4J.MImH1Dg_0002.jpg]]
 [[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_yVP2V7xiU4zW4J.MImH1Dg_0003.jpg]]
 [[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_yVP2V7xiU4zW4J.MImH1Dg_0004.jpg]]

[[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_yVP2V7xiU4zW4J.MImH1Dg_0005.jpg]][[MA_stat_kerenorchen_files/img/Image_yVP2V7xiU4zW4J.MImH1Dg_0006.jpg]]
