#+TITLE: hardware

* Hardware
** kitchen

*** rival ice cream maker

[[hardware_files/attach/rival_ice_cream.PDF][Attachment #01
(rival\_ice\_cream.PDF)]]

** Audio

*** Coonect your subwoofer with stero lines to RCA output amplifier

Here's the scenario: You have a home theater system with surround sound.
On the back of your stereo there is an RCA output for the subwoofer.
However, the problem is that your subwoofer has 2 stereo wire connectors
on the back, a positive and a negative. So what can you do? I've
encountered this problem myself and fortunately I have a few answers for
you.
 What you have is a subwoofer with a passive connection. What your
stereo expects you to have is a powered subwoofer that has either a
built in amplifier, or a subwoofer that is connected to an amplifier.
 First off, you are probably wondering if you can connect the subwoofer
to the RCA output with some kind of adapter. The answer is yes, BUT the
volume that comes out of the sub is so low that it is barely audible, if
at all. You won't damage anything, you just won't be able to hear any
sound from the sub and it will be useless.
 The reason for this is that the RCA subwoofer connection of the back of
your stereo is meant for an a subwoofer that has an amplifier either
built in to it, or a subwoofer that is connected to an amplifier. Either
the subwoofer with the amplifier built into it connects directly to that
RCA port (the subwoofer it's self will have a connection for an RCA
cable), or an amplifier connects between the subwoofer and the stereo
through that RCA port.
 But don't worry, all hope is not lost, you have two options.
 OPTION A) What you could do is go to your local Radio Shack or Walmart
and buy a cheap amplifier for your subwoofer. If you have money for
something expensive, then I suggest just buying a whole new subwoofer
that has an amp built in.
 OPTION B) The other option, and the one I tend to use in these
situations is to connect the subwoofer to either the left or right
speaker output, just like you did for your other right and left speakers
using normal stereo wire. Now you are probably wondering, if the right
and left speaker are already connected to the right and left speaker
connections on the stereo then how can i connect the subwoofer to one of
these?
 Well if your stereo is a good enough quality one that it has an RCA
port for a powered subwoofer, then chances are it actually has at least
2 connections for the right speaker and the left speaker. One group of
connections will be for an entire surround sound system. You will see
the front left, front right, back left, back right, center, subwoofer,
and possibly a few other connections.
 There very well may be another two connections that are just plain old
left and right stereo speaker connections, as you would see on any old
stereo. You can connect your subwoofer to either the left or right one
of these. You may have to play with your stereo settings to turn on
those speaker output though.
 This will work decently well, it will not sound as good as if you just
went ahead and bought a powered subwoofer like your home stereo expects
you to have. The subwoofer is built to only output low tones, thus when
you connect to the right or left speaker connection, your subwoofer will
only output the low tones from that connection and give you some bass,
not great bass, but it should still enhance your movie watching
experience.
 I hope this helps!
** Bicycle
*** citizen bike
**** how to fold/unfold
first watch this video

[[file:~/org/attach/files_2013/%E2%96%B6%20Citizen%20Bike%20TOKYO%20model%2016%20inch%20-%20YouTube.mp4][file:~/org/attach/files_2013/â–¶ Citizen Bike TOKYO model 16 inch - YouTube.mp4]]

some additional tips:

1)to fold the bike in the middle, 'lift' the central metal screw/cylindar and then fold

2) to secure the bike tightly when folding, move the metal lock all the way right and down :

#+attr_html: :width 400px

[[file:~/org/attach/images_2013/Bike_20131017_150947.jpg]]
