#+TITLE: tech

* Z_Tech
** mobile
*** hot mobile
**** call abroad
use 017 before normal numer ₆In example₆ for usa

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
017-1-617-9133391
#+END_EXAMPLE

** hardware
*** mp3 players

**** sansa clip

*Sansa Clip Firmware For Hardware Revision 2.0
*
 Follow the instructions below to verify the hardware revision of your
Clip before proceeding.
     * Turn on your Clip
     * Select Settings from the main menu
     * Select System Info
     * Look at the Version #
         Revision 1 = 1.XX.XX (example: 1.01.29)
         Revision 2 = 2.XX.XX (example: 2.01.16)
          
         If your Clip is Revision 1 click here
         If your Clip is Revision 2 proceed to the following
instructions.
  
  
 SanDisk has just released the 02.01.16 firmware revision for the Sansa
Clip. Download links and the release notes are available below.
 Let me start off by saying that majority of people will be able to
update his/her firmware through the Sansa Firmware Updater. There is
even a how-to video that explains the process. If for any reason the
aforementioned steps do not work for you, then please feel free to
continue by trying the more "computer savy" steps, described below.
 Windows Users can Connect the device in any Mode and follow the
instructions below.
 Mac and Linux users can connect their Clip in MSC mode and follow the
instructions below.
 MSC mode instructions:
    1. Turn on the Clip
    2. Put the device in Hold (move Hold button until orange is showing)
    3. Press and hold the Center Button
    4. Plug the mini-USB connector into the device (be sure the USB is
plugged into the computer)
    5. Wait for the Clip drive to mount
    6. Follow instructions below and drag files to the Clip drive
 For AMERICAS - You can download the .zip file by clicking on this link.
 For EUROPE w/o FM - You can download the .zip file by clicking on this
link.
 For EUROPE w/ FM - You can download the .zip file by clicking on this
link.
  
 For HEBREW w/o FM - You can download the .zip file by clicking on this
link.
 For HEBREW w/ FM - You can download the .zip file by clicking on this
link.
    1. Ensure your battery is > 50% full.
    2. Extract the .zip file into a folder on your computer.
    3. Once extracted, drag the file to the root directory of your Sansa
Clip.
    4. Disconnect the Sansa Clip and let it restart.
    5. The firmware update will now begin.
    6. Once it finally finishes doing its update, it will boot back up.
Once its back to the main menu, head to "Settings" > "System Info", and
verify the "Version" is now 02.01.16A.

***** clip-usermanual.pdf

[[tech_files/attach/clip-usermanual.pdf][Attachment #01
(clip-usermanual.pdf)]]

*** cellphones

**** nokia n97

1. Settings/Connectivity/Admin.settings/packet data/packet data
conncetions to "when needed" instead of "when available".
  
 2. Settings/Phone/Application sett./Messaging/E-Mail/Mailboxes and
there within all the mailboxes you use make sure to switch connection
settings/in+outgoing e-mail respectively/access point in use to default
connection.
  
 The latter is somehow obvious, the first I cannot entirley explain,
though it makes sense anyway, yet it worked as well around the issue
that I simply got disconnected when I left my WLAN instead of
re-connecting to gprs/umts/3g not only with mail but with any web
application as well.
  
 finally got a solution!!! inside C:\sys\bin folder
 just rename of HandyTaskmanLite.exe to JbakTaskMan.exe make sure to
have a backup!!!
 cheers!!!

***** gdesk

****** install how to

 Instructions:
 1. Extract files and install gdesk with all the plugins.
 2. Install Scarface by mowmo (attached)
 3. Move my designs to your memory card.
 4. Run GDesk
 5. Tap on bottom right corner
 6. Tap on Design
 7. Tap on load design, select E:/
 8. Load my designs and Enjoy!
 Instructions on how to run Shell and Gdesk simultaneously:
 1. Open Handy shell
 2. ** on options
 3. Tap on keys
 4. Select Red key closes current app
 5. Select exceptions
 6. Add GDesk
 How to make GDesk your standby screen:
 1. Run GDesk
 2. Tap on bottom right corner or any other BLANK space
 3. Select options
 4. Select Full Screen
 5. Repeat steps 2 and 3
 6. Select Replace Main. YOu're done now.
 Designs by smokydawg:
 This is Smunkgdblue.gdd
 This is smunk gdesk.gdd

***** n97 - delete mailboxes

Select "Messaging"
 -Highlight "your e-mail envelope" (don't open it)
 -Options > Setting > Email > Mailboxes> "Your email name" > Options>
Deletecreate a new mailbox
 Menu > Messaging
 Options > Settings
 Email > Mailboxes > {your mailbox} > Connection settings > Outgoing
e-mail

***** hard reset the n97

*Hard reset the N97 when it can't be powered up:
*
 press and hold Shift + Space + Backspace and push the power button.
Hold the three buttuns until the phone has booted.
 [[tech_files/img/image.png]]
 hard reset from withn n97 (software hard reset):
 in the dialer enter:
 *#7370# from the homescreen and entering Lock Code 12345.*
 Soft Reset/Normal Reset:*
 With this method, the mobile setting are restored to factory settings.
But it does not remove applications, games or anything installed. To do
this reset press *#7780#.

***** batch install

Automatically install applications!
 How to use:
 1, you need to copy all the applications you want to install on
E:\ThinkChange\c\ or E:\ThinkChange\e
 2, enter the AutoSisInstaller application, press "StartInstall", it
will automatically install all the files in that folder
 3, After the process is complete, there would be a summary telling you
which files failed to install.
 Why using AutoSisInstaller ?
 1, Have many favourite applications to install after a firmware update?
 2, Want to try many apps after bought a new phone?
 3, Get bored to press many keys to install an applicaton

***** remuco

To get remuco runing:
 install the sis file on the phone:
 copy the .jar and .jad files to device from the dl tar file in
/remuco-0.9.3/client/midp/app/ and install it
 then on the pc install through apt or AUR the remuco "server".
 run the appropriate command depending on your player (for example
"remuco-mpd"). this command can be added to startup apps so it auto
starts
 on the phone define settings:
 the IP address of the machine the "server" is ruining on
 and connect!!

**** nokia 6070

*If you have forgotten your code*
 and the default 12345 code doesn't work you will need to visit a care
point.

http://discussions.nokia.ie/discussions/board/message?board.id=phones&message.id=34219&query.id=80911#M34219*Connecting
a Nokia 6070 through USB in Linux
*
 I have finally got to try gnokii and here are my findings so far, in
case they are useful to others.
 After upgrading to Feisty, I installed the gnokii package from the
universe repository :
 Code:
 sudo apt-get install gnokii
 Actually, I used synaptic and installed all the recommended and
suggested packages as well.
 I then followed the instructions from the gnokii site
http://www.gnokii.org/docs.shtml and the gnokii wiki
http://wiki.gnokii.org/index.php/Config to create and edit the .gnokiirc
file in my home directory (in Ubuntu, a default configuration file is
created as /etc/gnokiirc; just copy it to your home directory as
.gnokiirc and edit it: it will override the /etc/gnokiirc configuration,
so there is no need to delete the default configuration file). Attached
is a copy of my configuration file (don't forget to rename it .gnokiirc
if you use it), which is working for a Nokia 6070 wiyh a CA-42 usb
cable.
 Note: the 6070 is not listed as supported in the gnokii documentation,
so I used the (default) "model=6510" as suggested in
http://wiki.gnokii.org/index.php/Config.
 I have not tried all the gnokii options yet, but I have successfully
applied both tests suggested in the documentation:
 Code:
 gnokii-identify
 Code:
 gnokii-monitor
 and have been able to dial a number using
 Code:
 gnokii -- dialvoice XXXXXXXXX
 Which proves communication between phone and computer is working!
 Debian/Ubuntu/gNewSense GNU/Linux user
 http://ubuntuforums.org/showthread.php?t=353450
 CONFIG FILE (/home/zeltak/.gnokiirc
 # This is a sample ~/.gnokiirc file. Copy it into your
 # home directory and name it .gnokiirc.
 # See http://wiki.gnokii.org/index.php/Config for working examples.
 #
 [global]
 # Set port to the physical port used to connect to your phone.
 # Linux version is:
 # port = /dev/ttyS0
 #
 # For MacOSX you will need something like:
 # port = /dev/cu.USA28X1P1.1
 #
 # For Win32 you want to use:
 # port = com1:
 # or similiar.
 #
 # FreeBSD (probably NetBSD and OpenBSD too) use:
 # port = /dev/cuaa0
 #
 # With Linux-IrDA you will want to use
 # port = /dev/ircomm0
 # or similiar.
 #
 # Use this setting also for the Bluetooth connection:
 # port = aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff
 # when using it with AT driver set it to:
 # port = /dev/rfcomm0
 # or similiar.
 #
 # For the Linux USB cables you will need one of the following settings
(or
 # similiar)
 port = /dev/ttyUSB0
 # port = /dev/tts/USB0
 # port = /dev/ttyACM0
 # the last one will work only with AT driver. The correct setting
should be
 # given in the dmesg output.
 # Set model to the model number of your phone. For the
 # Symbian phones use:
 # model = series60
 # For other non-Nokia phones and when you want to use AT
 # mode use:
 # model = AT
 # If you can't figure out what to put here read the FAQ.
 # If it still doesn't help, consult gnokii-ml or #gnokii at freenode.
 model = 6510
 # There are few main models that should make use of the certain
drivers.
 # These are: 6110, 7110, 6510, 3110, 2110, 6160.
 # Set IrDA device name.
 # If you use irda connection you may want gnokii to autodetect the irda
 # device it connects to. This is fine for most of the cases. if you
have
 # more than one device in range you may want to give manually the
device
 # name so gnokii correctly recognizes it. Use the name that you can see
 # in the discovery log when the phone with infrared is in the range of
 # your irda port.
 # Note that you need to set this for each phone\_ section separately.
It
 # isn't nested from the global section.
 # irda\_string = Nokia 6610i
 # Initlength controls the number of characters sent to the
 # phone during initialisation. You can either set it to
 # the word "default" or a positive integer.
 #
 # You can try setting this value if you want to connect
 # to the phone quicker. If you've never noticed the
 # connection to be slow, it is suggested that you
 # leave this alone. Read the initialisation code in fbus-xxxx
 # to understand what this changes if you're curious.
 initlength = default
 # The type of the connection, for IR set this to infrared or irda.
 # For the nk6110 driver only infrared is valid for the IrDA connection.
 # See Docs/gnokii-ir-howto for more detailes on this.
 # If you have 6210/6250/7110 phone and dau9p cable (the one you can
 # use with 6100 series and cannot use hardware modem from the phone)
 # you may want to use 'dau9p' value to get faster initialization.
 # If you use dlr3 or dlr3p cable for nokia phones in FBUS mode (ie.
 # you don't use model = AT) you may want to use 'dlr3p' value here.
 # Note that it is recommended and currently the best way to use this
 # cable with nk6510 driver.
 # connection = serial
 # With DKU-2 cable use the following setting if you want to libusb
driver
 # (recommended):
 # connection = dku2libusb
 # or the following setting if you want to use Linux kernel driver
 # connection = dku2
 # With DKU-5 cable use the following setting
 connection = dku5
 # For Bluetooth and AT driver use the following setting
 # connection = serial
 # For other Bluetooth settings use
 # connection = bluetooth
 # For infrared connection with phones other than Nokia 6110/6130/6150
use
 # connection = irda
 # Set this to 'yes' if you want gnokii to set and check the lock file
in
 # /var/lock directory. It avoids potential conflicts with other serial
 # port software (eg. minicom). If you have wrong permissions for the
 # directory, a warning will be generated. If you don't want a lockfile,
set
 # it to 'no'.
 use\_locking = yes
 # Baudrate to use on serial port connections.
 # Currently used only by models AT and BIP/CIMD. Defaults to 19200.
 serial\_baudrate = 19200
 # Force waiting after each send character the specified usec time.
 # Value -1 forces the fastest 'block' writing,
 # value 0 writes each character separately without any explicite
waiting,
 # other positive values specify the appropriate 1/1000000 sec delaying.
 # Siemens M20 requires at least "1"! FIXME: Model-driven autodetection
 #serial\_write\_usleep = 10000
 # Force serial port handshaking mode, useful primarily for "AT" model.
 # Gnokii "AT" model uses software handshake by default.
 # Possible values: hardware (RTS/CTS - 7 wires) or software (XON/XOFF -
3 wires)
 #handshake = software
 # If defined (not commented out by '#') it will quit Gnokii anytime
 # when DCD line will drop.
 #require\_dcd = 1
 # If you are using a bluetooth connection, you can specify the rfcomm
 # channel number here. Default value is 1.
 #rfcomm\_channel = 1
 # There may happen various timeouts during the communication with the
phone.
 # This parameter enables the retransmission policy. Ie. if the phone
doesn't
 # respond, we send the frame again. This happend mainly with the older
 # phones. You may want to enable it when you see mysterious timeouts.
 # Be very carefull with this option. It is suspected to cause phone
breakage
 # with new DCT4 phones (like Nokia 6100). By default it is switched off
 # (sm\_retry = 0)
 #sm\_retry = 1
 # Run the specified script(s) right after opening and initializing the
device
 # and before any communication (right before closing for
disconnect\_script).
 # You may find handy to use it to connect your modem to SMS Center
 # when using BIP or CIMD protocols
 # Non-absolute path is relative to the specific directory where gnokii
is run!
 #connect\_script = /absolute/path/to/gnokii/Docs/sample/cimd-connect
 #disconnect\_script =
 # When sending SMS you can experience timeouts. This is the feature of
the
 # overloaded SMSCs. The phones waits for the response from the SMSC
confirming
 # that it received the short message. When the SMSC is DoSed with many
requests
 # it will take more time to get the response. Adjust it to your needs.
The
 # value is given in seconds to wait. Defaults to 10 seconds. Set to 0
to wait
 # forever.
 smsc\_timeout = 10
 # Set bindir to point to the location of the various gnokiid binaries.
 # In particular ensure that mgnokiidev is in this location, with
 # permissions 4750, owned by root, group gnokii. Ensure you
 # are in the gnokii group and that the group exists...
 [gnokiid]
 bindir = /usr/local/sbin/
 # Any entries in the following two sections will be set as environment
 # variables when running the scripts.
 # Handy for use for $VAR substitutions in your chat(8) script.
 [connect\_script]
 TELEPHONE = 12345678
 [disconnect\_script]
 # The following parameters control how libgnokii handle the debugging
messages.
 # Currently there are three categories: "debug" controls the libgnokii
 # normal debug output, "rlpdebug" controls the debug output of the RLP
 # subsystem, and "xdebug" is used by the xgnokii or smsd.
 [logging]
 # where to log the debug output (on: stderr, off: /dev/null)
 debug = on
 # where to log the rlp debug output (on: stderr, off: /dev/null)
 rlpdebug = off
 # where to log X debug output (on: stderr, off: /dev/null)
 xdebug = off

**** motorola c380

*sync contacts to motorola phone*
 export to vcf
 import into outlook express
 transfer with motorola software on vmware
 Master reset code:
 000000

**** t-mobile

Voice mail number is 123

*** remote controls

**** hauppauge pvr-150 grey

*** cameras

**** canon a570is

See Manulas [[/home/zeltak/keepnote/attach/Hardware][Here]]

*** receivers

**** yamaha rx-v750

***** rx-v750\_e.pdf

[[tech_files/attach/rx-v750_e.pdf][Attachment #02 (rx-v750\_e.pdf)]]

*** wii
**** hack your wii for homebrew without twilight princess

[[http://lifehacker.com/5342733/hack-your-wii-for-homebrew-without-twilight-princess][*Hack
Your Wii for Homebrew without Twilight Princess
*
 Bummed because you've got a new Wii
and]][[http://lifehacker.com/400581/hack-your-wii-for-homebrew-apps-and-dvd-playback][the
Twilight Princess hack]] won't work on it? Have an older Wii but you
don't want to buy Twilight Princess just to install Homebrew? Try the
free and easy bannerbomb exploit.
                           
 Last year we showed you
[[http://lifehacker.com/400581/hack-your-wii-for-homebrew-apps-and-dvd-playback][how
to use the Twilight Princess hack]] to install the Homebrew Channel and
various goodies like DVD playback. The bannerbomb exploit is the newest
way to install the Homebrew Channel and works on the newest systems,
unlike Twilight Princess---which has been a defunct hack since menu 4.0
was introduced.
  
 How does it work? The hack exploits the Wii menu itself, loading a fake
banner which causes a system crash and allows the exploit to load
unsigned code. During our field testing it took---not counting time to
carefully read the instructions and take photographs---less than ten
minutes to complete the process.
  
 For this hack you'll need a Wii, an SD card formatted to FAT, a copy of
the [[http://bannerbomb.qoid.us/aads/aad1f_v108.zip][bannerbomb file]]
(I've linked to the banner bomb exploit file that works for the most
number of Wii units right out of the gate; if it doesn't work for you,
visit [[http://bannerbomb.qoid.us/][the main page and try some of the
other versions]]), and the [[http://bootmii.org/download/][HackMii
installer]]. The following instructions are an expanded photo-pictorial
version of the instructions found on the
[[http://bannerbomb.qoid.us/][bannerbomb exploit author's site]].
  
 [[tech_files/img/Image_wPt6jK5tw06uHQy2dHVmug_0001.png]]
 You'll need to copy the files from your computer to the SD card. If
you're using an SD card you already use for the Wii, you'll need to
rename the "private" directory to "privateold" for the duration of the
hack.
  
 First, unzip the contents of
the[[http://bannerbomb.qoid.us/aads/aad1f_v108.zip][banner bomb exploit
onto the card]]d. This should create a "private" directory with the
contents of the zip file.
  
 Next, copy the installer.elf file from
the[[http://bootmii.org/get.php?file=hackmii_installer_beta3.zip&key=1aa8b41c1a417b347bf138824347eb6c0255e283][HackMii
installer]]r onto the root of the SD card and rename it to boot.elf---as
seen above.
  
 Once you have the files on the SD card, it's time to toss it in the Wii
and boot up.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%202.png]]
  
 Here we are at the initial main menu of the Wii. Nothing special to see
here except for the fact that it's been over a week since we've hopped
on the Wii Fit.
  
 Click on the circular Wii icon in the lower left corner. DO NOT click
on the SD card icon if you've got a newer or updated Wii with the 4.0
menu. You won't hurt your Wii, but the exploit won't work.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%203.png]]
  
 Once you've clicked on the Wii icon, you'll be in the sub-menu seen
above. Click on Data Management to access the next menu.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%204.png]]
  
 Click on Channels to get to the SD card. You won't be able to access it
via the Save Data tab.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%205.png]]
  
 Click on the SD card tab to load the exploit.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%206.png]]
  
 The Wii will ask you "Load boot.dol/elf?", click Yes.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%207.png]]
  
 Not turning your Wii-hacking skills into a profit engine for global
domination is a very altruistic thing to do. Take a moment to be
thankful for all the awesome people in the world that create and
distribute the free and open-source software that makes our lives
better. Press 1 to continue loading the exploit.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%208.png]]
  
 At this point the exploit has been executed and the HackMii installer
is the temporary operating system---think LiveCD---of the Wii. From this
menu you can select whether or not you want to install The Homebrew
Channel, DVDx, and/or BootMii---BootMii is a more advanced tool which
you may or may not care to load, it's essentially a boot loader for the
Wii that provides a more extensive "takeover" of the Wii than The
Homebrew Channel. You can read more a[[http://bootmii.org/about/][here]]
it h[[http://hackmii.com/2008/10/bootmii-the-beginning/][here]]and here,
if you're curious.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%209.png]]
  
 On this menu you install or uninstall the respective tools. If this is
your first time running the HackMii Installer you won't see the
Uninstall option under any of the entries. During testing we forgot to
photograph this screen and hopped back into the installer to snap it.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%2010.png]]
  
 Install The Homebrew Channel? Yes, Ma'am.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%2011.png]]
  
 After you agree to install the The Homebrew Channel it usually installs
in a matter of seconds. Far faster than we were able to raise the camera
to snap a picture. You'll see the SUCCESS in cash-money-green when it is
done installing. You can repeat the installation process for DVDx and
BootMii if you desire.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%2012.png]]
  
 After The Homebrew Channel finishes installing you'll be taken to the
channel itself. The Homebrew Channel runs applications out of the
/YourSDCard/Apps/ folder. During this screenshot our SD card was empty,
thus the expansive bubbly-goodness of the default Homebrew screen. As
you add applications they will appear here.
  
 [[tech_files/img/image%2013.png]]
  
 Now we're back to the main menu. 12:46pm to 1:15pm and we're done!
Under 30 minutes, including stopping to take pictures.
  
 Wondering what you can do with it once you have the Homebrew Channel
installed? Well, for
exam[[http://lifehacker.com/5263589/back-up-and-play-your-wii-games-from-an-external-hard-drive][backup
your Wii games to a hard drive for safe keeping and faster load
times]]er[[http://lifehacker.com/5041110/soup-up-your-homebrew+hacked-wii][play
old-school games in emulation]] in
em[[http://lifehacker.com/5080006/play-burned-game-backups-on-your-wii-without-a-modchip][play
DVD-backups without a modchip]]out a modchip.
  

**** how to install the wii homebrew browser

-  Instructions    
-  *   *                                                             
-                                                                       
-  Step 1    
-                                                
-  The first thing you want to do is install the Twilight Princess Hack
   and Homebrew Channel if not already installed. I have eHows to
   explain this if they need to be installed
-
-  [http://www.ehow.com/how\_4522563\_wii-homebrew-soft-mod-wii.html and
   http://www.ehow.com/how\_4736509\_install-wii-homebrew-channel.html,
   respectively].
-                       
-     Step 2    
-                                                
-  Using a card reader on your PC, make sure your SD card is formatted
   to FAT 16/32. Also google "wiibrew: homebrew browser" to find the
   Homebrew Browser download.
-                       
-     Step 3    
-                                                
-  To add Homebrew Browser to your already installed Homebrew Channel,
   you need to make sure there is a folder called "Apps" on the root of
   your SD card. If there is not, make a folder and title it "Apps"
-  Step 4    
-                                                
-  Inside the Apps folder is where you will create a folder and title it
   "Homebrew Browser." Then put the files from the Homebrew Browser
   download into that folder. The files will be inside the
   "homebrew\_browser" folder you get when unzipping the download
   [meta.XML, icon.PNG, boot.dol, and settings.xml].
-                       
-  Step 5    
-                                                
-  Insert your SD card into your Wii and start it up. You will load the
   Homebrew Channel and in the application list, you should now see the
   Homebrew Browser. Simply click on it and it will load. Congrats! You
   now have the HB browser installed and will have less hassle to
   update, add, and remove Wii homebrew.
-              

**** play iso form usb and dvd

*How to play Wii backups from a usb stick with no modchip
*Tired of bad DVD burns? Wii laser die out on you? Want to rip Wii games
directly from your Wii's dvd to your hard drive? This instructable is
perfect for you! With this instructable, you will be able to play all
your favorite Wii games on your Wii from a usb stick or usb hard drive!
 *Hardware requirements:
*
 Wii
 3.4 or earlier Wii firmware
 Large usb stick or usb external usb hard drive.
 Computer with usb ports
 *Software requirements:
**[[/media/raid/Backups/3)HTPC-Wii/Wii/Wii%20backups%20from%20a%20usb%20stick][(Local
Files Link)]]
 [[http://www.instructables.com/id/Wii-Homebrew---Twilight-Hack/][The
Homebrew channel]]

[[http://wbfsmanager.codeplex.com/Release/ProjectReleases.aspx?ReleaseId=26808][WBFS
manager 3.0 or later]]
 [[http://www.megaupload.com/?d=TIP20JIM][rev 10 installer with usb
loader]]
 [[http://lmgtfy.com/?q=wii+isos][Wii game iso]]
 (OPTIONAL: [[http://www.megaupload.com/?d=ZIB899LQ][All region Wii game
covers]].)
 [[http://www.7-zip.org/][7-zip]]
 ###DISCLAIMER:
 I am not the author of these program, I am not responsible for any
damage you make to your Wii, computer, yourself, other people around
you, your dog, you get the picture. The programs are only for playing
backups of games you already own.###
 *step 1
**Install WBFS Manager.Download these files:*
 Uncompress the WBFS Manager rar file with 7-zip.
 Click on the WBFS Manager setup icon.
 A new screen will pop up and tell you that the program will install
WBFS Manager on your computer. Click next.
 It will then ask you to save to files in a folder. Either choose a
folder or leave it on the default folder.
 Click next. It will now tell you that it is ready to install to your
hard drive. Click Next to begin the installation process. When it is
done installing press "Close."
 [[tech_files/img/Image_6XU.Z5BkZ-Wt7EkC65m0uA_0001.png]]
 *
 step 2 Download the Wii iso to your usb device.This next step explains
how to load a Wii ISO to you usb device*.
 The first step is to get a Wii iso backup file. (I can't tell you
where.)
 Plug in your usb device in your computer . Click on the WBFS Manager
2.5 icon on your desktop. A new scree n will open. Use the drop-down tab
under "Edit" in the upper left corner to choose your usb device drive
letter.
 (WARNING: Be very careful not to format your hard drive! Make sure
you're drive number is right!)
 Now click format to delete the contents on your USB device and change
the format to WBFS.
 (Note: You will not be able to use the USB drive only to store Wii isos
because the computer operating system doesn't recognize the WBFS
format).
 After you're done formatting click the "Load button to load the
contents of your USB device. It's empty.
 Click the "Browse" button in the lower right corner to open a new
window, locate your Wii ISO, click it, and click "Open" in the lower
right corner.
 It will take a few seconds to load. You should see it in the right half
of the WBFS Manager window. Hover your mouse over it to see it's game
cover.
 Now click "Add to Device" to compress your Wii ISO and add it to your
usb device.
 It will take about 5 minutes to upload the file to a usb device.
 After it's done, either close the program and take your usb device out
of your computer and go to the next step, or add more games to your usb
device.
 *
 step 3 Install USB loader application on your Wii Homebrew Channel.This
next step will explain how to usb loader on your Wii.*
 Before you can install usb loader to your Wii you first need the files
in your SD card.
 Unrar the usb hack rar file with Winrar or 7-Zip and copy the contents
of the "Copy contents to root" folder to the root of your SD card.
Pretty self explanatory. If you get a window asking you to merge folders
click yes. Now comes the tricky part.
 (Optional: You can also download the covers for the games.
 The reason I say it's optional is because it contains over 1300 game
covers and will occupy 100 MB in your SD card. But it's convenient to
have so you don't have to squint to read the game text on the tv. Just
download it, uncompress the Covers zip file with 7-ZIP and drag the
covers folder to the usb-loader folder in the root on your SD card.. You
will get a prompt to merge folders and click yes )
 Remove any Gamecube memory cars and Gamecube controllers from the Wii.
 Insert the SD card into your Wii, turn the Wii on and go to the
Homebrew channel.
 Click on "cIOS36rev10" and click load. The screen will go black for a
second and you will then be in the cIOS36rev10 installer. Use the
directional arrows to choose WAD installation and click A. After a few
minutes it will have completed the installation of cIOS rev 10.
 Now, restart your wii, go back to the Homebrew channel, and go to Wad
Manager 1.3 and click load.
 Choose the SD card, press A, then choose the WAD
"USBLoadermodBrisma.wad" and press the + button on your Wii remote.
After a few moments it will have completed installing the USB channel.
 Press "HOME" on your Wii remote to restart your Wii.
 *
 Step 4 Using the USB loader channel and playing your games*.
 In this next step I will explain how to use your new Channel, and how
you can play your games on it.
 First, plug your usb device into your Wii usb slot and start the USB
loader channel.
 Here are the controls for the USB loader channel:
 "+" button: Lets you install a game. (I haven't figured out how this
works.)
 "-" button: Lets you delete a game.
 "A" button: Lets you select and start a game.
 "B" button: Lets you go back to menu if you choose the wrong game.
 "1" button: Forces the game to play in PAL mode.
 "2" button: Forces the game to play in NTSC mode.
 Next, use the left and right directional arrows to choose "USB mass
storage device", and click A.
 It will load all the games on your USB drive and if you downloaded the
covers it will show you their cover. Use the up and down directional
arrows and press "A" to choose your game. Press "A" again to load your
game and press "A" one last time to play your game.
 *
 Step 5: Intsall DVD loader (Backup launcher)*
*

-
    Back Up application (boot.dol)
   -->>[[http://www.megaupload.com/?d=38UXF376][www.megaupload.com/?d=38UXF376]]6
-
-
    •Backup Launcher.rar
-
-
    *"Backup Launche*r" folder goes into your APPS folder of your SD
   chip and RUNS through the*HOMEBRE*W channel
-
      [[tech_files/img/Image_6XU.Z5BkZ-Wt7EkC65m0uA_0002.png]]

  

**** dvd-r hack gamestyle

-  DVD-R hack gamestyle
-
-  *NOTE: dont use if installed the previous iso from usb hack!!!*
-
-  . Turn on your Ninendo Wii
-
-  . Unzip the APPS.zip file and copy all the folders onto the ROOT of
   your memory stick
-
-  . Run the Homebrew Channel
-  [[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0001.png]]
-  If you have any problems just ask it in the comments below.
-
-
     *. Run Boot.dol* (takes seconds. Just press "A" to install
   everything normally)
-
-
     *. Run DVDX* (takes seconds. Just press "A" to install everything
   normally)
-
-
      [[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0002.png]]
-
-
     *. wad manager 1*.3 is a highly recommended wad manage
-  r(You can chose to install the IOC.WAD
-  )
-
    Back Up Channel.wad
   -->[[http://www.megaupload.com/?d=OTJ6JS1W][www.megaupload.com/?d=OTJ6JS1W]]1

*W**
 (Launcher 0.3 Gamma NTSC.wa*d

-  )Install through WAD manage
-  r
-
-
-
-
-
-
    Back Up application (boot.dol)
   -->[[http://www.megaupload.com/?d=38UXF376][www.megaupload.com/?d=38UXF376]]7
-  6
-
    •Backup Launcher.ra
-  r
-
    *•"Backup Launch*er" folder goes into your APPS folder of your SD
   chip and RUNS through the HOMEBREw channe
-  l
-  [[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0003.png]]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-  NOW Your Wii SHOULD be ready to play backup
-  s.
-  . Download your back up game(
-  s)
-  [[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0004.png]]
-  UNZIP 'em to get your ISO (image) f
-  ile
-
     [[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0005.png]]
-  . use IMAGE BURN to burn iso / image file to a D
-  VD-
-  R

   [[http://www.megaupload.com/?d=DQCREAVQ][www.megaupload.com/?d=DQCREAVQ]][[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0006.png]]
-
-  www.megaupload.com/?d=DQCREAVQ
-  (
-  install IMAGE BURN to your PC)
-  Run
-  IM
-  AGE burn after installation
     [[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0007.png]]• •
-  . S
-  ele
-  ct
-  "write image File to Disc
     
     [[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0008.png]]• •. #1 -
   Select the ISO
-  folder (where ever you UNZIPPED it
-  )
-  . #2 - Select the "WRITE" button OPTIONAL: I ALWAYS click the
-  "verify" button when burning DVD's
    OPTIONAL: Lots of resources s*u*ggest the WRITE SPEED should be on 4
   I had it
-  on
-  "a
-  uto
-  " and it worked just fine.
     
     [[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0009.png]]• •. Let
   the DVD b
-  urn (may take about 5 to 10 minutes). When it's done, put the DVD
   into your Wii and run the back up launcher (either through the
   HOMEBREW channel apps or the Channel o
-  n t
-  he
-  wii

menu (if you installed it)
 •
 •
 •

[[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0010.png]][[tech_files/img/Image_jTYXFueUMiojQGEqQbwCqw_0011.png]]

**** games
     
***** mario galaxy

*Hint: Infinite 1-Ups for Super Mario Galaxy       *                    
                                                            

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
 If you grab any 1-Up Mushroom at the Comet Observatory, you can then
head into any dome, back out, and arrive back at the Comet Observatory
without having played any stage. This will make the 1-Up Mushroom you
acquired reappear.

*** thumb drives

**** u3

*How do I uninstall U3 from my flash drive*:
 Most U3 smart drives come with an uninstall utility that converts the
U3 smart drive into a regular USB flash drive. This utility can be
accessed from the U3 Launchpad. Open the U3 Launchpad and click on
Settings, then select U3 Launchpad Settings and click on the Uninstall
tab. Some devices have a link to the Uninstall utility under Help and
Support.
  
 If you can not find the uninstall utility on your U3 smart drive you
can download it from the following locations:
 [[http://u3uninstall.s3.amazonaws.com/U3Uninstall.exe][Remove U3]]
 [[/media/raid/Backups/2)Windows%20Backup/6)Utils/U3%20uninstall][(local
link)]]

[[http://communities.sandisk.com/sandisk/board/message?board.id=u3&thread.id=1066][U3
removal tool for MAC]]

*** gps

**** holux gr-230

 hard-coded bluetooth pairing password: 6268

*** tv

**** zenith

***** calibration

﻿Settings used:
 Aspect Ratio: 16:9
 Energy Saving: Off
 Picture Mode: Expert 1 (Expert 2 is fine as well, these are just 2
slots to store an advanced profile and access the advanced settings)
 Contrast: 77 (will likely change after Picture Wizard but this is a
good starting point)
 Brightness: 53 (will likely change after Picture Wizard but this is a
good starting point)
 H. Sharp: 39 (will likely change after Picture Wizard but this is a
good starting point)
 V. Sharp: 50
 Color: 50
 Tint: 0
 Color Temp: W30 (This setting is hidden to find it, click on tint-->you
will get the gray bar at the bottom of the screen to adjust tint-->press
the down arrow and there it appears
 Now select Expert control
 Dynamic Contrast: Off
 Noise Reduction: Off
 Gamma: Medium
 Black Level: Low
 Film Mode: On
 Color Gamut: Standard
 Edge Enhancement: Off
 White Balance: Warm
 Method: 20 Point IRE
 Pattern: Outer
 Now comes the IRE part. This part is a bit confusing in how it is
implemented. Basically, each time you select an IRE value treat the
values below it as a new set of values. Why they did it this way I have
no clue. Anyways here are the values (as you will see some are REALLY
far off):
 Also incase you can't figure it out r=red g=green b=blue.
 5 ire r=0 g=0 b=0
 10 ire r=-16 g=0 b=-36
 15 ire r=0 g=0 b=0
 20 ire r=-17 g=-13 b=-34
 25 ire r=-9 g=0 b=-37
 30 ire r=-6 g=9 b=-29
 35 ire r=0 g=0 b=-13
 40 ire r=9 g=17 b=-25
 45 ire r=0 g=0 b=0
 50 ire r=-10 g=0 b=-42
 55 ire r=-18 g=0 b=-10
 60 ire r=15 g=20 b=-37
 65 ire r=-18 g=0 b=0
 70 ire r=5 g=30 b=-31
 75 ire r=-9 g=9 b=-29
 80 ire r=-6 g=19 b=50
 85 ire r=0 g=0 b=0
 90 ire r=-8 g=16 b=-9
 95 ire r=0 g=0 b=0
 100ire r=-5 g=0 b=-24
 Red color 0
 Red tint -1
 Green color -6
 Green tint 0
 Blue color -8
 Blue tint 0
 Yellow color -5
 Yellow tint 11
 Cyan color -2
 Cyan tint -2
 Magenta color -3
 Magenta tint -10
 Pasted from
<[[http://slickdeals.net/permadeal/57926/sears.com-50-zenith-z50pv220-1080p-plasma-hdtv?&page=27#comments][http://slickdeals.net/permadeal/57926/sears.com-50-zenith-z50pv220-1080p-plasma-hdtv?&page=27#comments]]>[[http://slickdeals.net/forums/report.php?p=42623140][]]

*** htpc

﻿
 NCS Small Form Factor Desktop Case with:
 250watt (80+certified high efficiency) power supply
 External Drive Bays: 1x 3.5", 1x 5.25"
 Internal Drive Bays: 1x 3.5", 1x 2.5"
 MSI K9A2GM-FIH m-ATX motherboard socket AM2+ 780G chipset
 Integrated ATI Radeon HD2300 Video with VGA and HDMI output with up to
512mb shared ram
 Sata-2, firewire, HD Audio, 1x PCI-E, 1x PCI-E x16, and 2x 32-bit PCI
slots. 4x Dual-Channel DDR2 RAM sockets.
 AMD Sempron LE-1300 @ 2.3Ghz with 512kb cache (45watt "Energy
Efficient" line)
 HD5500 HDTV Tuner Card (PCI Low Profile)
 Kingston Memory 2x 512mb DDR2-667 Dimms (1Gb total RAM -- 4 slots, 2
open)
 Seagate Barracuda SV Hard Drive 250Gb / 7200rpm / 32mb buffer
SATA-II/300mb
 D-Link WDA-2320 Wireless B/G Network Adapter (PCI Low Profile)
 Pasted from
<[[http://boston.craigslist.org/sob/sys/2711627925.html][http://boston.craigslist.org/sob/sys/2711627925.html]]>

*** emotiva

**** cto i talked to

i talked to the CTO .. Loni
 told me about being able to send the speakers back to change it to 220

** windows
*** windows

**** symlink in windows

mklink [[/D] | [/H] | [/J]] link target

**** serial # win 7

I've downloaded a win7 home premium edition (64 bit).
 Key is:
 *DX6YX-VT4WX-2W7V2-RK6JQ-MFCYD*

*** troubleshooting-fail

**** NTLDR is Missing

*NTLDR is Missing: Press any key to restart
*
 Windows XP User/become Root commands
    1. Insert the Windows XP bootable CD into the computer.
    2. When prompted to press any key to boot from the CD, press any
key.
    3. Once in the Windows XP setup menu press the "R" key to repair
Windows.
    4. Log into your Windows installation by pressing the "1" key and
pressing enter.
    5. You will then be prompted for your administrator password, enter
that password.
    6. Copy the below two files to the root directory of the primary
hard disk. In the below example we are copying these files from the
CD-ROM drive letter "E". This letter may be different on your computer.
       cd e:
       copy e:\i386\ntldr c:\
       copy e:\i386\ntdetect.com c:\

*** Software
**** MS office

***** excel

****** intro

 Merge cells from all or some worksheets into one Master sheet
 Ron de Bruin (last update 22-Nov-2008)
 Go back to the Excel tips page
 The examples will add a worksheet with the name RDBMergeSheet to your
workbook and will copy cells
 from every worksheet in the ActiveWorkbook to this worksheet. Each time
you run one of the examples it
 will first delete the summary worksheet named RDBMergeSheet if it
exists and then adds a new one to
 the workbook. This ensures that the data is always up to date after you
run the code.
 In the examples I use a values/formats copy but below the first example
there is example code to copy
 only the values or everything to the RDBMergeSheet.
 Important:
 The macro examples use the LastRow or LastCol function that you can
find in the last section of this page.
 Copy the macro(s) and function(s) in a standard module of your
workbook.
 If you have no idea where to paste the code then check out this page.
 http://www.rondebruin.nl/code.htm
 Example workbook
 Download a zip file with a workbook with the code from this page to
test the examples.
 Download MergeWorksheetsCode.zip
 Copy a range of each sheet
 Note: This example use the function LastRow
 This example copy the range A1:G1 from each worksheet.
 Change the range here
 'Fill in the range that you want to copy
 Set CopyRng = sh.Range("A1:G1")
 Sub CopyRangeFromMultiWorksheets()
     Dim sh As Worksheet
     Dim DestSh As Worksheet
     Dim Last As Long
     Dim CopyRng As Range
     With Application
         .ScreenUpdating = False
         .EnableEvents = False
     End With
     'Delete the sheet "RDBMergeSheet" if it exist
     Application.DisplayAlerts = False
     On Error Resume Next
     ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets("RDBMergeSheet").Delete
     On Error GoTo 0
     Application.DisplayAlerts = True
     'Add a worksheet with the name "RDBMergeSheet"
     Set DestSh = ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets.Add
     DestSh.Name = "RDBMergeSheet"
     'loop through all worksheets and copy the data to the DestSh
     For Each sh In ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets
         If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then
             'Find the last row with data on the DestSh
             Last = LastRow(DestSh)
             'Fill in the range that you want to copy
             Set CopyRng = sh.Range("A1:G1")
             'Test if there enough rows in the DestSh to copy all the
data
             If Last + CopyRng.Rows.Count > DestSh.Rows.Count Then
                 MsgBox "There are not enough rows in the Destsh"
                 GoTo ExitTheSub
             End If
             'This example copies values/formats, if you only want to
copy the
             'values or want to copy everything look at the example
below this macro
             CopyRng.Copy
             With DestSh.Cells(Last + 1, "A")
                 .PasteSpecial xlPasteValues
                 .PasteSpecial xlPasteFormats
                 Application.CutCopyMode = False
             End With
             'Optional: This will copy the sheet name in the H column
             DestSh.Cells(Last + 1,
"H").Resize(CopyRng.Rows.Count).Value = sh.Name
         End If
     Next
 ExitTheSub:
     Application.Goto DestSh.Cells(1)
     'AutoFit the column width in the DestSh sheet
     DestSh.Columns.AutoFit
     With Application
         .ScreenUpdating = True
         .EnableEvents = True
     End With
 End Sub
 Tips to change the examples
 In the example above I copy the range A1:G1 but you can also use
 Set CopyRng = sh.UsedRange
 To copy all cells with data on the sheet
 Set CopyRng = sh.Range("A1").CurrentRegion
 To copy the current region of cell A1
 The current region is a range bounded by any combination of blank rows
and blank column
 Set CopyRng = sh.Rows("1")
 To copy a whole row or rows( use "1:8" then)
 Copy only values or everything
 Replace this :
     CopyRng.Copy
     With DestSh.Cells(Last + 1, "A")
         .PasteSpecial xlPasteValues
         .PasteSpecial xlPasteFormats
         Application.CutCopyMode = False
     End With
 With:
     With CopyRng
         DestSh.Cells(Last + 1, "A").Resize(.Rows.Count, \_
             .Columns.Count).Value = .Value
     End With
 If you only want to copy the values.
 Or Replace this :
     CopyRng.Copy
     With DestSh.Cells(Last + 1, "A")
         .PasteSpecial xlPasteValues
         .PasteSpecial xlPasteFormats
         Application.CutCopyMode = False
     End With
 With:
 CopyRng.Copy DestSh.Cells(Last + 1, "A")
 If you want to copy everything.
 Do not loop through all sheets in the workbook
  
 Tip 1:
 Replace this line:
 If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then
 With:
 If LCase(Left(sh.Name, 4)) = "week" Then
 If you want to copy only from sheets with a name that start with week.
 Tip 2:
 Replace this line:
 If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then
 with:
 If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name And sh.Visible = True Then
 If you want to copy only from the visible sheets in your workbook.
 Tip 3:
 Replace this line:
 For Each sh In ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets
 With:
 For Each sh In ActiveWorkbook.Sheets(Array("Sheet1", "Sheet3"))
 And remove this two lines:
 If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then and End If before Next
 If you want to copy only from sheets that are in the Array.
 Tip 4:
 Replace this line:
 If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then
 With:
 If IsError(Application.Match(sh.Name, \_
 Array(DestSh.Name, "Total Sheet", "Menu Sheet"), 0)) Then
 If you want to exclude more sheets then the DestSh.
 Copy from row 2 till the last row with data
 Note: This example use the function LastRow
 Note: You can use the tips above also in this example
 In example 1 you can see that you can copy all cells on a worksheet
with this line:
 Set CopyRng = sh.UsedRange
 But what if we do not want to copy the same header row each time.
 The example below will copy from row 2 till the last row with data on
each sheet
 Change the start row in the macro if you want to start in a different
row.
 'Fill in the start row
 StartRow = 2
 If you want to copy the header row in the first row of the
RDBMergeSheet
 then copy the code below if each worksheet have the same headers after
 this line : If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then
 'Copy header row, change the range if you use more columns
 If WorksheetFunction.CountA(DestSh.UsedRange) = 0 Then
   sh.Range("A1:Z1").Copy DestSh.Range("A1")
 End If
 Sub CopyDataWithoutHeaders()
     Dim sh As Worksheet
     Dim DestSh As Worksheet
     Dim Last As Long
     Dim shLast As Long
     Dim CopyRng As Range
     Dim StartRow As Long
     With Application
         .ScreenUpdating = False
         .EnableEvents = False
     End With
     'Delete the sheet "RDBMergeSheet" if it exist
     Application.DisplayAlerts = False
     On Error Resume Next
     ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets("RDBMergeSheet").Delete
     On Error GoTo 0
     Application.DisplayAlerts = True
     'Add a worksheet with the name "RDBMergeSheet"
     Set DestSh = ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets.Add
     DestSh.Name = "RDBMergeSheet"
     'Fill in the start row
     StartRow = 2
     'loop through all worksheets and copy the data to the DestSh
     For Each sh In ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets
         If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then
             'Find the last row with data on the DestSh and sh
             Last = LastRow(DestSh)
             shLast = LastRow(sh)
             'If sh is not empty and if the last row >= StartRow copy
the CopyRng
             If shLast > 0 And shLast >= StartRow Then
                 'Set the range that you want to copy
                 Set CopyRng = sh.Range(sh.Rows(StartRow),
sh.Rows(shLast))
                 'Test if there enough rows in the DestSh to copy all
the data
                 If Last + CopyRng.Rows.Count > DestSh.Rows.Count Then
                     MsgBox "There are not enough rows in the Destsh"
                     GoTo ExitTheSub
                 End If
                 'This example copies values/formats, if you only want
to copy the
                 'values or want to copy everything look below example 1
on this page
                 CopyRng.Copy
                 With DestSh.Cells(Last + 1, "A")
                     .PasteSpecial xlPasteValues
                     .PasteSpecial xlPasteFormats
                     Application.CutCopyMode = False
                 End With
             End If
         End If
     Next
 ExitTheSub:
     Application.Goto DestSh.Cells(1)
     'AutoFit the column width in the DestSh sheet
     DestSh.Columns.AutoFit
     With Application
         .ScreenUpdating = True
         .EnableEvents = True
     End With
 End Sub
 Copy a range/column after the last column with data
 Note: This example use the function LastCol
 This example copy column A from each sheet after the last column with
data on the DestSh.
 I use A:A to copy the whole column but you can also use a range like
A1:A10
 Use A:C if you want to copy more columns.
 Change it here
 'Fill in the column(s) that you want to copy
 Set CopyRng = sh.Range("A:A")
 Remember that Excel 97-2003 have only 256 columns.
 Excel 2007 has 16384 columns.
 Sub AppendDataAfterLastColumn()
     Dim sh As Worksheet
     Dim DestSh As Worksheet
     Dim Last As Long
     Dim CopyRng As Range
     With Application
         .ScreenUpdating = False
         .EnableEvents = False
     End With
     'Delete the sheet "RDBMergeSheet" if it exist
     Application.DisplayAlerts = False
     On Error Resume Next
     ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets("RDBMergeSheet").Delete
     On Error GoTo 0
     Application.DisplayAlerts = True
     'Add a worksheet with the name "RDBMergeSheet"
     Set DestSh = ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets.Add
     DestSh.Name = "RDBMergeSheet"
     'loop through all worksheets and copy the data to the DestSh
     For Each sh In ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets
         If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then
             'Find the last Column with data on the DestSh
             Last = LastCol(DestSh)
             'Fill in the column(s) that you want to copy
             Set CopyRng = sh.Range("A:A")
             'Test if there enough rows in the DestSh to copy all the
data
             If Last + CopyRng.Columns.Count > DestSh.Columns.Count Then
                 MsgBox "There are not enough columns in the Destsh"
                 GoTo ExitTheSub
             End If
             'This example copies values/formats and Column width
             CopyRng.Copy
             With DestSh.Cells(1, Last + 1)
                 .PasteSpecial 8 ' Column width
                 .PasteSpecial xlPasteValues
                 .PasteSpecial xlPasteFormats
                 Application.CutCopyMode = False
             End With
         End If
     Next
 ExitTheSub:
     Application.Goto DestSh.Cells(1)
     With Application
         .ScreenUpdating = True
         .EnableEvents = True
     End With
 End Sub
 Where do I copy the macros and functions from this page?
 1. Alt-F11
 2. Insert>Module from the Menu bar
 3. Paste the Code there
 4. Alt-Q to go back to Excel
 5. Alt-F8 to run the subs
 Common Functions required for all routines:
 Function LastRow(sh As Worksheet)
     On Error Resume Next
     LastRow = sh.Cells.Find(What:="*", \_
                             After:=sh.Range("A1"), \_
                             Lookat:=xlPart, \_
                             LookIn:=xlFormulas, \_
                             SearchOrder:=xlByRows, \_
                             SearchDirection:=xlPrevious, \_
                             MatchCase:=False).Row
     On Error GoTo 0
 End Function
 Function LastCol(sh As Worksheet)
     On Error Resume Next
     LastCol = sh.Cells.Find(What:="*", \_
                             After:=sh.Range("A1"), \_
                             Lookat:=xlPart, \_
                             LookIn:=xlFormulas, \_
                             SearchOrder:=xlByColumns, \_
                             SearchDirection:=xlPrevious, \_
                             MatchCase:=False).Column
     On Error GoTo 0
 End Function
 More Information
 Consolidating Data from Multiple Worksheets into a Summary Worksheet in
Excel
 http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc793964.aspx
 Create a summary worksheet from all worksheets (with formulas)
 http://www.rondebruin.nl/summary.htm
 You can find more about finding the last row or column on this page
 http://www.rondebruin.nl/last.htm
 Merge data from all workbooks in a folder
 http://www.rondebruin.nl/copy3.htm

****** append last column

Sub AppendDataAfterLastColumn()
     Dim sh As Worksheet
     Dim DestSh As Worksheet
     Dim Last As Long
     Dim CopyRng As Range
     With Application
         .ScreenUpdating = False
         .EnableEvents = False
     End With
     'Delete the sheet "RDBMergeSheet" if it exist
     Application.DisplayAlerts = False
     On Error Resume Next
     ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets("RDBMergeSheet").Delete
     On Error GoTo 0
     Application.DisplayAlerts = True
     'Add a worksheet with the name "RDBMergeSheet"
     Set DestSh = ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets.Add
     DestSh.Name = "RDBMergeSheet"
     'loop through all worksheets and copy the data to the DestSh
     For Each sh In ActiveWorkbook.Worksheets
         If sh.Name <> DestSh.Name Then
             'Find the last Column with data on the DestSh
             Last = LastCol(DestSh)
             'Fill in the column(s) that you want to copy
             Set CopyRng = sh.Range("C:C")
             'Test if there enough rows in the DestSh to copy all the
data
             If Last + CopyRng.Columns.Count > DestSh.Columns.Count Then
                 MsgBox "There are not enough columns in the Destsh"
                 GoTo ExitTheSub
             End If
             'This example copies values/formats and Column width
             CopyRng.Copy
             With DestSh.Cells(1, Last + 1)
                 .PasteSpecial 8 ' Column width
                 .PasteSpecial xlPasteValues
                 .PasteSpecial xlPasteFormats
                 Application.CutCopyMode = False
             End With
         End If
     Next
 ExitTheSub:
     Application.Goto DestSh.Cells(1)
     With Application
         .ScreenUpdating = True
         .EnableEvents = True
     End With
 End Sub

****** last row function

Function LastRow(sh As Worksheet)
     On Error Resume Next
     LastRow = sh.Cells.Find(What:="*", \_
                             After:=sh.Range("A1"), \_
                             Lookat:=xlPart, \_
                             LookIn:=xlFormulas, \_
                             SearchOrder:=xlByRows, \_
                             SearchDirection:=xlPrevious, \_
                             MatchCase:=False).Row
     On Error GoTo 0
 End Function

****** last colum function

Function LastCol(sh As Worksheet)
     On Error Resume Next
     LastCol = sh.Cells.Find(What:="*", \_
                             After:=sh.Range("A1"), \_
                             Lookat:=xlPart, \_
                             LookIn:=xlFormulas, \_
                             SearchOrder:=xlByColumns, \_
                             SearchDirection:=xlPrevious, \_
                             MatchCase:=False).Column
     On Error GoTo 0
 End Function

****** import batch txt files

 Copy every TXT or CSV file that you select in a new worksheet of a
newly created workbook
 Ron de Bruin (last update 30-Aug-2007)
 Go back to the Excel tips page
 Example for TXT files
 The macro below will copy every txt file that you select with
GetOpenFilename to your workbook.
 If you select ten txt files in the folder then you end up with 10 new
worksheets in
 your workbook. Each worksheet will have the name of the txt file.
 Note: you can hold the CTRL key if you want to select more files or use
the Shift key to select
 a block of files in GetOpenFilename. Tip: With Ctrl a you select all
files in the folder.
 I did not use all the properties for QueryTables in my macro because a
lot of them are already
 what I want by default. If you don't get the results you want then
record a macro when you
 perform the action manually.
 Then look at the recorded code and add the code lines to the macro
Get\_TXT\_Files.
 Copy all code in a normal module of your workbook
 Alt F11
 Insert Module
 Paste the code
 Alt q to go back to Excel
 Alt F8 to open the macro dialog
 Select the macro and press Run
 This example is for Delimited txt files, see the example below this
macro for FixedWidth
 Read the information in the macro Get\_TXT\_Files before you try the
macro.
 Maybe you want to use a different delimiter or change the format of a
column.
 Private Declare Function SetCurrentDirectoryA Lib \_
         "kernel32" (ByVal lpPathName As String) As Long
 Public Function ChDirNet(szPath As String) As Boolean
 'based on Rob Bovey's code
     Dim lReturn As Long
     lReturn = SetCurrentDirectoryA(szPath)
     ChDirNet = CBool(lReturn <> 0)
 End Function
 Sub Get\_TXT\_Files()
 'For Excel 2000 and higher
     Dim Fnum As Long
     Dim mysheet As Worksheet
     Dim basebook As Workbook
     Dim TxtFileNames As Variant
     Dim QTable As QueryTable
     Dim SaveDriveDir As String
     Dim ExistFolder As Boolean
     'Save the current dir
     SaveDriveDir = CurDir
     'You can change the start folder if you want for
     'GetOpenFilename,you can use a network or local folder.
     'For example ChDirNet("C:\Users\Ron\test")
     'It now use Excel's Default File Path
     ExistFolder = ChDirNet(Application.DefaultFilePath)
     If ExistFolder = False Then
         MsgBox "Error changing folder"
         Exit Sub
     End If
     TxtFileNames = Application.GetOpenFilename \_
     (filefilter:="TXT Files (*.txt), *.txt", MultiSelect:=True)
     If IsArray(TxtFileNames) Then
         On Error GoTo CleanUp
         With Application
             .ScreenUpdating = False
             .EnableEvents = False
         End With
         'Add workbook with one sheet
         Set basebook = Workbooks.Add(xlWBATWorksheet)
         'Loop through the array with txt files
         For Fnum = LBound(TxtFileNames) To UBound(TxtFileNames)
             'Add a new worksheet for the name of the txt file
             Set mysheet = Worksheets.Add(After:=basebook. \_
                                 Sheets(basebook.Sheets.Count))
             On Error Resume Next
             mysheet.Name = Right(TxtFileNames(Fnum),
Len(TxtFileNames(Fnum)) - \_
                                     InStrRev(TxtFileNames(Fnum), "\", ,
1))
             On Error GoTo 0
             With ActiveSheet.QueryTables.Add(Connection:= \_
                         "TEXT;" & TxtFileNames(Fnum),
Destination:=Range("A1"))
                 .TextFilePlatform = xlWindows
                 .TextFileStartRow = 1
                 'This example use xlDelimited
                 'See a example for xlFixedWidth below the macro
                 .TextFileParseType = xlDelimited
                 'Set your Delimiter to true
                 .TextFileTabDelimiter = True
                 .TextFileSemicolonDelimiter = False
                 .TextFileCommaDelimiter = False
                 .TextFileSpaceDelimiter = False
                 'Set the format for each column if you want (Default =
General)
                 'For example Array(1, 9, 1) to skip the second column
                 .TextFileColumnDataTypes = Array(1, 9, 1)
                 'xlGeneralFormat General 1
                 'xlTextFormat Text 2
                 'xlMDYFormat Month-Day-Year 3
                 'xlDMYFormat Day-Month-Year 4
                 'xlYMDFormat Year-Month-Day 5
                 'xlMYDFormat Month-Year-Day 6
                 'xlDYMFormat Day-Year-Month 7
                 'xlYDMFormat Year-Day-Month 8
                 'xlSkipColumn Skip 9
                 ' Get the data from the txt file
                 .Refresh BackgroundQuery:=False
             End With
       ActiveSheet.QueryTables(1).Delete
         Next Fnum
         'Delete the first sheet of basebook
         On Error Resume Next
         Application.DisplayAlerts = False
         basebook.Worksheets(1).Delete
         Application.DisplayAlerts = True
         On Error GoTo 0
 CleanUp:
         ChDirNet SaveDriveDir
         With Application
             .ScreenUpdating = True
             .EnableEvents = True
         End With
     End If
 End Sub
 Example for txt files with a Fixed Width
 Replace :
                 'This example use xlDelimited
                 'See a example for xlFixedWidth below the macro
                 .TextFileParseType = xlDelimited
                 'Set your Delimiter to true
                 .TextFileTabDelimiter = True
                 .TextFileSemicolonDelimiter = False
                 .TextFileCommaDelimiter = False
                 .TextFileSpaceDelimiter = False
 With:
                 .TextFileParseType = xlFixedWidth
                 'Set the width for each column
                 .TextFileFixedColumnWidths = Array(5, 4, 8)
 Example for CSV files
 The macro below will copy every csv file that you select with
GetOpenFilename to your workbook.
 If you select ten csv files in the folder then you end up with 10 new
worksheets in
 your workbook. Each worksheet will have the name of the csv file.
 Note: you can hold the CTRL key if you want to select more files or use
the Shift key to select
 a block of files in GetOpenFilename. Tip: With Ctrl a you select all
files in the folder.
 Copy all code in a normal module of your workbook
 Alt F11
 Insert Module
 Paste the code
 Alt q to go back to Excel
 Alt F8 to open the macro dialog
 Select the macro and press Run
 Note: if the result is not what you expect, it is because you have no
control over how Excel imports the
 csv files. if you change the extension from csv to txt you can use the
macro above for txt files and
 have more control (format of the columns)
 Private Declare Function SetCurrentDirectoryA Lib \_
             "kernel32" (ByVal lpPathName As String) As Long
 Public Function ChDirNet(szPath As String) As Boolean
 'based on Rob Bovey's code
     Dim lReturn As Long
     lReturn = SetCurrentDirectoryA(szPath)
     ChDirNet = CBool(lReturn <> 0)
 End Function
 Sub Get\_CSV\_Files()
 'For Excel 2000 and higher
     Dim Fnum As Long
     Dim mybook As Workbook
     Dim basebook As Workbook
     Dim CSVFileNames As Variant
     Dim SaveDriveDir As String
     Dim ExistFolder As Boolean
     'Save the current dir
     SaveDriveDir = CurDir
     'You can change the start folder if you want for
     'GetOpenFilename,you can use a network or local folder.
     'For example ChDirNet("C:\Users\Ron\test")
     'It now use Excel's Default File Path
     ExistFolder = ChDirNet(Application.DefaultFilePath)
     If ExistFolder = False Then
         MsgBox "Error changing folder"
         Exit Sub
     End If
     CSVFileNames = Application.GetOpenFilename \_
         (filefilter:="CSV Files (*.csv), *.csv", MultiSelect:=True)
     If IsArray(CSVFileNames) Then
         On Error GoTo CleanUp
         With Application
             .ScreenUpdating = False
             .EnableEvents = False
         End With
         'Add workbook with one sheet
         Set basebook = Workbooks.Add(xlWBATWorksheet)
         'Loop through the array with csv files
         For Fnum = LBound(CSVFileNames) To UBound(CSVFileNames)
             Set mybook = Workbooks.Open(CSVFileNames(Fnum))
             'Copy the sheet of the csv file after the last sheet in
             'basebook (this is the new workbook)
             mybook.Worksheets(1).Copy After:= \_

                                      basebook.Sheets(basebook.Sheets.Count)
             On Error Resume Next
             ActiveSheet.Name = Right(CSVFileNames(Fnum),
Len(CSVFileNames(Fnum)) - \_

                                            InStrRev(CSVFileNames(Fnum),
"\", , 1))
             On Error GoTo 0
             mybook.Close savechanges:=False
         Next Fnum
         'Delete the first sheet of basebook
         On Error Resume Next
         Application.DisplayAlerts = False
         basebook.Worksheets(1).Delete
         Application.DisplayAlerts = True
         On Error GoTo 0
 CleanUp:
         ChDirNet SaveDriveDir
         With Application
             .ScreenUpdating = True
             .EnableEvents = True
         End With
     End If
 End Sub
 More information
 If you want to merge csv or txt files in one worksheet then see this
page.
 http://www.rondebruin.nl/csv.htm
 For more information about importing txt files visit Chip Pearson's
site.
 http://www.cpearson.com/excel/imptext.htm
 Saving XL files as Text/CSV (J.E McGimpsey)
 http://www.mcgimpsey.com/excel/textfiles.html

****** example

Private Declare Function SetCurrentDirectoryA Lib \_
         "kernel32" (ByVal lpPathName As String) As Long
 Public Function ChDirNet(szPath As String) As Boolean
 'based on Rob Bovey's code
     Dim lReturn As Long
     lReturn = SetCurrentDirectoryA(szPath)
     ChDirNet = CBool(lReturn <> 0)
 End Function
 Sub Get\_TXT\_Files()
 'For Excel 2000 and higher
     Dim Fnum As Long
     Dim mysheet As Worksheet
     Dim basebook As Workbook
     Dim TxtFileNames As Variant
     Dim QTable As QueryTable
     Dim SaveDriveDir As String
     Dim ExistFolder As Boolean
     'Save the current dir
     SaveDriveDir = CurDir
     'You can change the start folder if you want for
     'GetOpenFilename,you can use a network or local folder.
     'For example ChDirNet("C:\Users\Ron\test")
     'It now use Excel's Default File Path
     ExistFolder = ChDirNet(Application.DefaultFilePath)
     If ExistFolder = False Then
         MsgBox "Error changing folder"
         Exit Sub
     End If
     TxtFileNames = Application.GetOpenFilename \_
     (filefilter:="TXT Files (*.txt), *.txt", MultiSelect:=True)
     If IsArray(TxtFileNames) Then
         On Error GoTo CleanUp
         With Application
             .ScreenUpdating = False
             .EnableEvents = False
         End With
         'Add workbook with one sheet
         Set basebook = Workbooks.Add(xlWBATWorksheet)
         'Loop through the array with txt files
         For Fnum = LBound(TxtFileNames) To UBound(TxtFileNames)
             'Add a new worksheet for the name of the txt file
             Set mysheet = Worksheets.Add(After:=basebook. \_
                                 Sheets(basebook.Sheets.Count))
             On Error Resume Next
             mysheet.Name = Right(TxtFileNames(Fnum),
Len(TxtFileNames(Fnum)) - \_
                                     InStrRev(TxtFileNames(Fnum), "\", ,
1))
             On Error GoTo 0
             With ActiveSheet.QueryTables.Add(Connection:= \_
                         "TEXT;" & TxtFileNames(Fnum),
Destination:=Range("A1"))
                 .TextFilePlatform = xlWindows
                 .TextFileStartRow = 1
                 .TextFileParseType = xlFixedWidth
                 'Set the width for each column
                 .TextFileFixedColumnWidths = Array(7, 7, 7)
                 'Set the format for each column if you want (Default =
General)
                 'For example Array(1, 9, 1) to skip the second column
                 .TextFileColumnDataTypes = Array(1, 1, 1)
                 'xlGeneralFormat General 1
                 'xlTextFormat Text 2
                 'xlMDYFormat Month-Day-Year 3
                 'xlDMYFormat Day-Month-Year 4
                 'xlYMDFormat Year-Month-Day 5
                 'xlMYDFormat Month-Year-Day 6
                 'xlDYMFormat Day-Year-Month 7
                 'xlYDMFormat Year-Day-Month 8
                 'xlSkipColumn Skip 9
                 ' Get the data from the txt file
                 .Refresh BackgroundQuery:=False
             End With
         ActiveSheet.QueryTables(1).Delete
         Next Fnum
         'Delete the first sheet of basebook
         On Error Resume Next
         Application.DisplayAlerts = False
         basebook.Worksheets(1).Delete
         Application.DisplayAlerts = True
         On Error GoTo 0
 CleanUp:
         ChDirNet SaveDriveDir
         With Application
             .ScreenUpdating = True
             .EnableEvents = True
         End With
     End If
 End Sub

****** get macros available in all your workbooks

 How do I create a PERSONAL.XLS(B) or Add-in
 Ron de Bruin (last update 8-april-2008)
 Go back to the Excel tips page
 PERSONAL.XLS(B)
 If you want that certain code is available in all your workbooks, then
use your
 PERSONAL.XLS or in Excel 2007 your PERSONAL.XLSB file.
 What is it:
 This is a hidden workbook that opens when you start Excel.
 The code you copy in this workbook is available in all workbooks you
have opened in Excel.
 Where is it:
 If it exists, you can find the file in the Excel startup folder.
 C:\Documents and Settings\Ron\Application Data\Microsoft\Excel\XLSTART
 In Vista look here
 C:\Users\Ron\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Excel\XLSTART
 Note: Ron is the username in the path above
 With code you find the correct path on your machine with this line
 1) Open excel
 2) Hit alt-F11 to get to the VBE
 3) Hit ctrl-g to see the immediate window and type this:
 4) ?Application.StartupPath
 You'll see the startup path returned
 How do you create the file if it does not exist:
 If it does not exist then record a dummy macro and change the "Store
macro in:"
 drop down to Personal Macro Workbook. Excel creates the file for you
then in the correct folder.
 Excel 97-2003: Tools>Macro...Record New Macro.
 Excel 2007: On the "Developer" tab click on Record macro.
 To display the "Developer" tab go to Office Button >Excel
Options...Popular.
 Or faster click the button on the bottom left corner of the Excel 2007
window to start the recording.
 Press OK in the dialog that you see now
 Because we only want Excel to create the file for us we can stop the
recording directly.
 Press the Stop Recording button or use Tools>Macros...Stop recording in
Excel 97-2003
 In Excel 2007 you can press the Stop Recording Button on the Developers
tab or click the
 button on the bottom left corner of the Excel window to stop the
recording
 Now we use Alt F11 to go to the VBE editor(working in all Excel
versions)
 Or:
 Excel 97-2003: Tools>Macro>Visual Basic Editor.
 Excel 2007: Click on the button named "Visual Basic" on the "Developer"
tab
 Make the file ready
 Note: I use the name PERSONAL.XLS in the text below but in Excel 2007
the name is PERSONAL.XLSB
 To be sure that we see the Project Window, Code window and the
Properties window we use one time.
 Ctrl-r (to see the project explorer)
 F7 (to view the code window)
 F4 (to view the properties window)
 Now we give the PERSONAL.XLS a unique project name (Default is
VBAProject)
 Select the PERSONAL.XLS in the project window and change the name in
the properties window.
       
 Now use Ctrl-s or File>Save in the VBA editor to save the PERSONAL.XLS.
 We are now ready to add code (macros or/and functions) to this file so
we can use it in all the workbooks.
 With Insert>Module in the VBA editor you can also add more modules to
the PERSONAL.XLS.
 This way you can organize your code in this file.
 Use only code here that you use yourself and not code that you use in
files that you distribute to other users.
 In this case add the code in the modules of the workbook itself. Or see
the ”Add-in” part on this page.
 Example 1: Macro
 Public Sub Test()
     MsgBox "Insert your favorite code here"
 End Sub
 1) Select the PERSONAL.XLS in the project window and click on the +
before it
 2) Then click on the + before Modules
 3) Double click on Module1 to open the code window on the right
 4) We copy/paste the example macro in this module.
 5) Now use Ctrl-s or File>Save in the VBA editor to save the
PERSONAL.XLS.
 6) We use Alt--q to go back to Excel or use "File >Close and Return to
Microsoft Excel".
 7) You can run the macro then with Alt-F8 or Tools>Macro...Macros /
Developer tab>Macros
 Note: You can delete the dummy macro that we used to create the
PERSONAL.XLS.
 Example 2: Function
 This function gives you the ISO week number that is used in Europe and
a lot of other countries.
 Note: This function is not available in Excel.
 Public Function IsoWeekNum(d1 As Date) As Integer
 ' Daniel Maher
     Dim d2 As Long
     d2 = DateSerial(Year(d1 - Weekday(d1 - 1) + 4), 1, 3)
     IsoWeekNum = Int((d1 - d2 + Weekday(d2) + 5) / 7)
 End Function
 1) Select the PERSONAL.XLS in the project window and click on the +
before it
 2) Then click on the + before Modules
 3) Double click on Module1 to open the code window on the right
 4) We copy/paste the example function in this module.
 5) Now use Ctrl-s or File>Save in the VBA editor to save the
PERSONAL.XLS.
 6) We use Alt--q to go back to Excel or use "File >Close and Return to
Microsoft Excel".
 Now we can use this in a worksheet cell with the date in A1
 =PERSONAL.XLS!IsoWeekNum(A1)
 If you create a reference in the workbook where you want to use it to
your
 PERSONAL.XLS then you can use
 =IsoWeekNum(A1)
 Go to Tools>References in the VBA editor with the workbook selected in
the project window and
 add a check mark before RonPersonal. (Save the workbook then)
 Problems with the PERSONAL.XLS(B) workbook
 What to do if your PERSONAL.XLS(B) is visible
 When you open Excel and you see PERSONAL.XLS(B) in the title bar you
can use this to hide it.
 Excel 97-2003: Window>Hide
 Excel 2007 : On the View tab in the window group choose Hide
 Then close Excel and say Yes to save the changes to your PERSONAL file.
 PERSONAL.XLS(B) will not open but is in the correct location
 When Excel think the file is corrupt it can disable the file.
 You can re-enable it here but if it is really corrupted replace it with
a backup.
 Excel 2002-2003: Help>About MS Excel>Disabled items
 Excel 2007 : Office button>Excel Options..Add-ins
                               In the "Manage:" dropdown (bottom of the
dialog)
                               Choose "Disabled Items
                               Go
 Use a Add-in
 You can also create an add-in to store code that you want to use in all
workbooks.
 (A add-in is also a hidden workbook like PERSONAL.XLS)
 This is a good way if you want to distribute code to other users. Open
a new workbook and copy
 the code in this workbook and then use File>Save As or Office
Button>Save As to save it as
 Excel Add-in, use a name like MyUtility.xla for example(xlam in Excel
2007).
 Before you save it give MyUtility.xla a unique project name (Default is
VBAProject)
 see how I do it above with the PERSONAL.XLS(B).
 You can install the add-in like this:
 1) Tools>Add-ins in Excel 97-2003
     Office Button>Excel Options..Add-ins and then Manage Excel
add-ins...Go in Excel 2007
     Or use the shortcut (Alt ti example for the English version)
 2) Browse to the XLA(M) file
 3) OK
 4) Add a check mark before it in the list
 5) OK
 Now every time you open Excel it opens the add-in and you can use the
code in all workbooks.
 Note: Add-in macros not show up in Alt-F8 or in Tools>Macro...Macros in
97-2003 or in
 Developer tab>Macros in 2007. You must make a menu for the macros in
the add-in.
 Create your own menu/toolbar to run the code
 Excel 97-2003
 Debra Dalgleish's (Toolbar example from Dave Peterson)
 http://www.contextures.com/xlToolbar02.html
 Creating Custom Menus (John Walkenbach)
 http://www.j-walk.com/ss/excel/tips/tip53.htm
 Ole P. Erlandsen's Web Site (Example workbooks)
 http://www.erlandsendata.no/english/index.php?d=endownloadcommandbars
 How to customize menus and menu bars in Excel

http://support.microsoft.com/default.aspx?scid=kb;en-us;830502&Product=xlw
 Excel 2007
 In Excel 2007 check out this example for your PERSONAL.XLSB
 http://www.rondebruin.nl/qat.htm
 If you want to change the ribbon check out this page
 http://www.rondebruin.nl/ribbon.htm
 Note: It is not possible to use XML to create a menu for your
PERSONAL.XLSB.
 Use the QAT example then
  

****** combine multiple columns to one

to do that:
 make sure your columns are formatted as general
 in a new column (again general) go to the first cell and choose the
formula concentrate (under the text catagory)
 choose the colums to join

****** how to apply a formula to the entire column in excel other than
draging it down

As long as there are no blank rows, go to the first cell, then hover
your mouse to the lower right hand corner of that cell until the cursor
becomes a black plus, then double click. It will copy the formula down
until it finds a break (blank cell) in what you're trying to copy.

***** MS office serial

Keys for office:
 *JYDVV-4X4Y9-RD3PG-GXGCG-WKF83
 or:
 MCJH7-RQH6B-KB2GD-49RTB-89TGG*

**** powerpoint

***** macro for mass change fonts

*Change Font for Whole Presentation*
 This vba will save your life when someone produces a presentation with
different font styles and colours on every page and because they don't
follow the Master you have to change each one individually. This vba
will do the job in a tick!. You will need to change the values for font
name, size and RGB values for title and body text and maybe set .bold
and / or .italic to msotrue. Note only text in Placeholders is
converted.
 Sub allchange()
 Dim osld As Slide, oshp As Shape
 For Each osld In ActivePresentation.Slides
 For Each oshp In osld.Shapes
 If oshp.Type = msoPlaceholder Then
 'Title text change values as required
 If oshp.PlaceholderFormat.Type = 1 or oshp.PlaceholderFormat.Type = 3
Then
 With oshp.TextFrame.TextRange.Font
 .Name = "Arial"
 .Size = 36
 .Color.RGB = RGB(0, 0, 255)
 .Bold = msoFalse
 .Italic = msoFalse
 .Shadow=false
 End With
 End If
 If oshp.PlaceholderFormat.Type = 2 or oshp.PlaceholderFormat.Type = 7
Then
 'Body text change values as required
 With oshp.TextFrame.TextRange.Font
 .Name = "Arial"
 .Size = 24
 .Color.RGB = RGB(255, 0, 0)
 .Bold = msoFalse
 .Italic = msoFalse
 .Shadow=false
 End With
 End If
 End If
 Next oshp
 Next osld
 End Sub

**** mp3tagger

***** Install

*Music*
 Tagging: mp3tagger
 [[http://www.mp3tag.de/en/][http://www.mp3tag.de/en/]]

**** utils

***** treecopy- copy folder file structure

dl and use treecopy
 [[tech_files/img/SS-2011-04-01_08.19.22.png]]

**** gvim

***** install

Question: On UNIX / Linux platform, I've used Vi or Vim editors and I'm
very comfortable with it. I would like to use Vim editor on Windows OS
also. How do I install and configure Vim editor for Windows platform (
Windows XP, Vista or Windows 7 )?
 Answer: Follow the steps mentioned below to install and configure the
gVim editor on Windows platform.
 1. Download Vim for Windows
 Go to Vim Download page and click on "PC: MS-DOS and MS-Windows". Click
on the ‘gvim72.exe, which is a Self-installing executable.
 (or) Download gvim72.exe directly.
 2. Install gVim
 After downloading click on gVim72.exe, which will install gVim on your
Windows as shown below.
 *Configure gVim
*
     On UNIX platform Vim configuration file is called .vimrc
     On Windows platform the vim configuration file is called \_vimrc
     \_vimrc file is located under $HOME/\_vimrc. For example:
C:\Documents and Settings\ramesh\\_vimrc
     Please note there is a \_ (underscore) before vimrc on Windows
platform

**** command prompt

***** cat command in windows (type)

this can be used as an alternative to the nix 'cat' command
 Combine 2 text files into one:
 UNIX: cat file1 file2 > file3
 DOS: type file1 file2 > file3
 DOS: copy file1+file2 file3

**** notepad++
***** comment blocks of text

use:
 ctrl-k
 or for inverse action:
 ctrl+q

***** select columns

use:
 Alt-mosue select

***** append prefix text (using regex)

Below is information on how to both append data to every line in a text file and how to prefix data to every line in a text file.
Append Data To Every Line In A Text File With Notepad++:
Open Text File: First open the text file you want to append data to every line in Notepad++. open replace (ctrl-h) Modify Search Mode: Now you need to make sure and change the Search Mode to Regular Expression by clicking the radio button next to "Regular Expression" as shown in the below image. The Search Mode is configured in the bottom left of the Search window.

`Append Text`

In the "Find What" field you should enter

#+begin_src
\^(.+)$
#+end_src
which will find every line of text and in the "Replace With" field you will enter

#+begin_src
\1TEXTTOAPPEND
#+end_src
The '\1' is text located from the Find What field which will be followed by whatever you want to append to each line.
Once you have filled in Find What and Replace With click the Replace All button which will add the text after the 1 to every line and display a popup confirmation displaying how many lines were modified. Now save the file and data is appended to every line.

`prefix each line`
If you want to prefix each line with data in Notepad++ simply add the
data you want to prefix before the '\1' in the Replace With box and then
click the Replace All button to make the modification to the text file.

**** Clavier- windows keyboard customizing app

[[http://utilfr42.free.fr/util/Clavier.php][http://utilfr42.free.fr/util/Clavier.php]]

**** box.net

***** map box.net on windows

Basically, what we're going to do is set Box up as a Network Location in
your computer. To do this:
 1. Open My Computer
 2. Right click on My Computer and select Add a Network Location
 3. Click Next
 4. Select Choose a custom network location and click Next
 5. Enter “[[https://www.box.net/dav”][https://www.box.net/dav”]] into
the box and click Next
 6. Enter a name for the Box folder that will be created -- maybe "Box"?
-- and click Next
 7. Enter your Box username and password and click Next
 8. Get ready to use your Box!
**** foobar2000
***** add the replygain column in playlist view
The RGain Column

Create one last column named RGain, set width to 60 and make it right-aligned. This one holds replaygain info: the album gain value for album tracks and the track gain value for single tracks. You might want to read some more about replaygain on replaygain.org.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
$if($get_global(isAlbum)
,
$if2(%__replaygain_album_gain%,'n/a')
,
$if2(%__replaygain_track_gain%,'n/a')
)
#+END_EXAMPLE


Nothing fancy here. We check for album tracks and display %__replaygain_album_gain% info or %__replaygain_track_gain% info respectively. Missing replaygain triggers ‘n/a’ display like in the Time column.
*** installation

**** installation from thumb drive

*Windows XP Installation using a Single Thumbdrive
*
  First, you need to DL the following (or check zeltak archives to see
if already there..)
  USB\_Multiboot5
  Before you begin, extract your XP install files to a folder. I
recommend using C:\XP\_SRC or something similarly named. Don't put any
spaces in the folder name, and try to use as short a path as possible.
 When that's done, run USB\_Multiboot5.cmd.
 Introduction screen - just press any key to continue.
 By now, if you haven't plugged in your thumbdrive, plug it in! Press H
to use the HP USB Disk Storage Format Tool. That way, you can format
your thumbdrive in NTFS and reduce the time taken for the installation.
 Select your thumbdrive in the first drop-down box, choose NTFS as your
file system, and optionally label your thumbdrive. Once done, click
Start. A scary warning pops up about how ALL DATA WILL BE LOST, just
click OK . A short summary screen appears once the format is done, click
OK, and then click Close to go back to the command window
  Now you're presented with a text menu where you can change some
options.
 Leave Option 0 as [USB-stick] since we're installing from a thumbdrive.
 Enter 1, and select the folder where your XP install files are stored.
 Next, enter 3 and select the drive letter of your thumbdrive.
 Check that your final screen looks something like this (your Source
Path and USB-Drive Target may vary)
  If everything's done, enter 4 to start the process!
 Now watch a bunch of text scroll past the window . A dialog box should
appear soon:
 Press Yes to continue! You're now one step closer to getting your XP
installation onto your thumbdrive Let it run until you see the next
dialog box:
  Press Yes - this makes the thumbdrive always take the drive letter U:
so as to avoid conflicts later on during the install process.
 Finally, we see the end screen:
  Press any key to continue, and you're done! Your thumbdrive is now
ready for use!
  Plug in your thumbdrive into your Eee PC (or any other
desktop/laptop), and press Esc while booting to enter the Boot Menu.
Boot from your thumbdrive.
 This text menu should appear with 2 options:
 Step 1 - TEXT MODE SETUP
 Step 2 - GUI MODE SETUP + BOOT WINDOWS XP
 Select Step 1. Continue with the Text Mode Setup - you will be
selecting a drive to install XP to.
 Remember to press Esc again after first reboot!!!
 Remember to press Esc again! Boot from your thumbdrive once again. This
time select Step 2, and continue with the GUI Mode Setup - you will be
selecting another bunch of options, as well as entering your CD-Key.
  There'll be another reboot, press Esc again to enter the Boot Menu!
Boot from your thumbdrive for the last time, and select Step 2 once
again
  Windows XP will start loading, and once it's done you'll be at your
desktop
 Disclaimer: I'm not sure whether there are any side effects from using
my winnit.sif. If it's not working, please tell me and I'll see what I
can do.
 Troubleshooting
 Q. Windows Setup cannot find the CD ROM (or something similar).
 A. Set the drive letter of your thumbdrive to U:. You will be prompted
towards the end of the thumbdrive creation process.
 Q. USB\_Multiboot has problems finding my XP Source files.
 A. Use a simpler path that's shorter and without spaces eg C:\XPSRC
 Q. I've followed the steps, but I encounter an error at Step 2
 A. Did you remember to delete all existing partitions on the SSD?

*** System
**** login

*Method 1
*
 Click Start, Run and type CONTROL USERPASSWORDS2, and click Ok. Select
the user account from the list (the account to which you want to
automatically logon). Uncheck Users must enter a user name and password
to use this computer option, and click Ok. Type the user account
password and complete the process.
 For Windows XP Home, don't try to auto-login as the built-in
Administrator, as you'll receive an error message.
 [[tech_files/img/Image_q6w4KIi1xaKKNqZtpDKHQQ_0001.png]]*
 Method 2**
*
 Open TweakUI (Click Start, Programs, Powertoys for Windows XP). Expand
the Logon branch, and click Autologon. Turn on the "Log on automatically
at......" option, type your username and password, and click Ok.
 [[tech_files/img/Image_q6w4KIi1xaKKNqZtpDKHQQ_0002.png]]

**** misc

*windows illigeal characters
*
 >< / \ : * ? " |

**** windows 7 time off when dual booting with linux

Windows 7 time off when dual booting with Linux
 I'm dual booting Linux (Fedora 11 with Gnome) and Windows 7. If I set
the time in Windows, then boot into Linux, the time remains correct.
When I boot back into Windows, the time is off by a few hours. After
some reading, it seems that Linux is using UTC time and Windows is using
local time.
 This issue can be fixed by changing either OS, but because the problem
seems to be with Windows mishandling UTC time, I chose to correct it
there by turning on a feature called RealTimeIsUniversal. When
RealTimeIsUniversal is enabled, Windows will treat the Real-Time Clock
(RTC) from the motherboard as UTC time.
 Open Regedit, drill down to:
 HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\TimeZoneInformation
 and create a new DWORD entry named "RealTimeIsUniversal". Set the value
to 1.
 Shut down Windows and boot Fedora. Set the correct time in Fedora,
shutdown, and boot back into Windows. The time should be accurate if you
have set your local time to the correct time zone.
 It seems that there are problems with Windows XP and Vista whereby
Sleep/Hibernate would cause Windows to revert to local time upon
waking/resuming, but apparently this has been resolved in Windows 7.
 If you prefer to change Fedora, go to Date/Time Properties via System >
Administration > Date & Time or by opening a terminal and entering:
 system-config-time
 Under the Time Zone tab, clear the checkbox next to "System clock uses
UTC".
 Under the Network Time Protocol tab, select Enable Network Time
Protocol.
 Note that your BIOS has no idea what timezone you are in, that's up to
the OS to figure out. If you check the time in the BIOS, it will likely
be a few hours off, and that's OK.

*** pocet pc

**** tips

*
**find MAC Address:*
  
 To see MAC Address and other system info:
 START, Settings, System, Asset Viewer, Wireless LAN. *
**Frogpad*
 I also have an ipaq (4150) and I think I know what is going on.
 The connection is slightly difficult to do. It must be done in a
sequence.
 1) Make sure the FP is in pairing mode (blinking)
 2) Then Search for it in the HID2GO app. Once found, it should say in
the column HID "YES". If you don't get this result, don't go further;
things won't work.
 3) You now have to go to the connection tab. In here, you MUST SELECT
the frogpad in the list so it is highlighted, and ONLY THEN click
connect now.
 When this happens, on the ipaq, enter a number (best idea is to use the
pop up keyboard). I just enter "1" to keep it simple.
 4) Only now you go back to your frogpad and hit "number" then "1" then
number again and then enter. At this point the connection should get
established and you're set. You can go to the test tab and try to type.
 Admittedly all this is not exactly obvious, but Leapfrog is about to
post an interim manual, as he said in his earlier post i nthis thread to
explain precisely how to do this.
 Hope this info helps. Just remember to do things in the exact sequence
and you should get it right. And don't forget to disconnect once done
before you power off the ipaq or the FP, or else strange things will
happen upon power on. This is for the time being only, it is getting
fixed as we speak.
 Peter
 Application Details:
 ===============
 Platform : Microsoft Embedded VC++ 4.0.
 OS : WINCE 4.20
 Tools : POCKETPC2003SDK,WIDCOMM BTW-CE SDK for Windows Mobile™ 2003 for
PocketPC
 Installation notes for HID2GO Application for WindowsCE:
 ============================================
 1) Connect Pocket PC device to the desktop system.
 2) Double click on setup.exe.
 3) Follow the instruction displayed on the screen on desktop and
device.
 Files Included:
 1) Release Notes.txt
 2) ReadMe.txt
 3) HID2GO.Arm 1100 (4K) v3.00
 4) Setup.exe
 5) Setup.txt
 This application has been developed and tested for PocketPC 2003.
 Note:
 This Setup application installs Handheld HID2GO application and
associated database file[HID2GO]. Handheld HID2GO application's Database
file can be found in the windows folder with the name "HID2GO" on the
device.
 During Uninstallation database file is also deleted from the device.
User should manually take the backup of the database file before
uninstallation if it is required.
 How to run the Application :
 =====================
 1.Go to Bluetooth manager and enable Bluetooth from your Pocket PC.
 2.Ensure the Frogpad Keypad and PPC are fully charged and reset the
frogpad.
 3.Load the Application.
 4.select the Application form the start Menu.
 5.Tap on OK button to enter in to the Application.
 6.Tap on the "Search" button to go to the search page.
 7.Tap on the "Search Now" button to start searching for the Bluetooth
devices.
 8.Select the device and tap on "Connect" button to connect the device
in Search Dialog.
 9. Tap on the "Status" tab to go to the connect page.
 10. Select the device and tap on the "Connect Now" button.
 11. A window is displayed asking to type Numeric passkey and press
enter with in 30secs from the PocketPc keyboard.Type same passkey what u
have entered and then press "ENTER" on the keyboard.
 12. The device status is updated from "Disconnected" to "Connected".
 13. Now tap on the "Test" tab and use the keyboard to test it.
 14. Go to the "Setup" page to map the applications to each of the
Function keys.
 15. To disconnect the device, tap on the "Disconnect" button on the
"Connect" page
 16. After the device is disconnected reset the device that disconnected
and again connect.
 17. To set the Keyboard Settings of the Keyboard that connected tap on
"Keyboard Settings" and set.
 18. Tap on the "Cancel" button on the "Home" page to Unload the driver.
 Uninstallation notes for HID2GO Application for WindowsCE:
 ===============================================
 1) Connect Pocket PC device to the desktop system.
 2) Select "Tools\Add/Remove programs" from Menu of Microsoft ActiveSync
application on the desktop.
 3) Select "HID2GO" from the list and say Remove. This will uninstall
Handheld HID2GO application on the desktop. Database file is also
deleted from the device.*PPC SSH Config*
 ello, In order to use
 support February 7, 2006 - 2:53pm
 Hello,
 In order to use private/public keys, they must exist in pairs under
"ssh\_keys" directory and the public key file must have a ".pub" file
extension. For example, if the private key file is named "my\_ssh\_key",
the public key *must* be "my\_ssh\_key.pub".
 Please also note that mToken searches the "ssh\_keys" directory in the
storage device that you selected for your Address Book. For example, if
you have selected 'Main Memory' for your address book, mToken looks for
keys under '\My Documents\mToken\ssh\_keys". However, if you have
selected 'Storage Card', '\Storage Card\mToken\ssh\_keys' is searched.
 To find out whether or not mToken recognized the private/public keys,
or to assign a specific key for the server, open SSH Config window and
select 'User Auth. Methods' and tap 'Config'. The combo-box labeled "For
'publickey' method" should list your private key file names.
 Hope this helps. :-)
 Best regards,
 Support Team (support@choung.net)
 Choung Networks | http://www.choung.net/
 PS. Version 4.0.0 had some problems handling private/public key files.
Please use newly released version 4.0.1. We sincerely apologize for the
inconvenience.
 * Login or register to post comments
 Brilliant, absolutely
 Tricky\_Luck February 8, 2006 - 2:54am
 Brilliant, absolutely brilliant.......
 It's .... what can I say..... brilliant!!!!!
 Thanks for the quickest answer from a support team in the history of
the world....ever!!
 That worked a treat,
 Thankyou, thankyou thankyou!!!!
 * Login or register to post comments
 I don't understand. You mean
 defaria August 17, 2006 - 1:01am
 I don't understand. You mean to tell me that I need to take
~/.ssh/id\_rsa and ~/.ssh/id\_rsa.pub and copy them to my Pocket PC in
the right location and mToken will automagically allows me to ssh into
my server? I have tried that and it fails to work stating that the
server rejected the key.
 I have a server, let's call it srv1, that I only allow public/private
key authentication to. Normally I generate my public/private keys on say
desktop1 (I use Cygwin) then I copy the contents of
desktop1:~/.ssh/id\_rsa.pub -> srv1:~/.ssh/authorized\_keys. Then, and
only then, can desktop1 ssh into srv1.
 So wouldn't I need ssh keys generated on pocketpc1 and then need to
transfer those keys -> srv1:~/.ssh/authorized\_keys?
 If so then how do I do that since mToken can't generate ssh keys...?
 * Login or register to post comments
 I have a server, let's call
 support August 17, 2006 - 10:10am
 I have a server, let's call it srv1, that I only allow public/private
key authentication to. Normally I generate my public/private keys on say
desktop1 (I use Cygwin) then I copy the contents of
desktop1:~/.ssh/id\_rsa.pub -> srv1:~/.ssh/authorized\_keys. Then, and
only then, can desktop1 ssh into srv1.
 *Frogpad*
 After adding the desktop1:~/.ssh/id\_rsa.pub to
srv1:~/.ssh/authorized\_keys, use the desktop1:~/.ssh/id\_rsa.pub and
desktop1:~/.ssh/id\_rsa with mToken. As you mentioned, the public key
*must* be added to server's public key list file(e.g.,
srv1:~/.ssh/authorized\_keys) before it can be used for login
authentications.
 mToken recognizes private/pub keys generated with the key generation
tool that came with OpenSSH and SSH.com's SSH servers. Since Cygwin uses
OpenSSH, you shouldn't have any problem using the keys generated in
Cygwin with mToken. (It seems your server is also OpenSSH, thus you can
use the keys generated from your server with mToken as well as with
Cygwin.)
 So to summarize, if your server is OpenSSH, 1) connect to your server,
2) generate a key pair, 3) add public key to ~/.ssh/authorized\_keys, 4)
move private/public key files to mToken.
 By the way, our Windows SSH client(SecureToken,
http://choung.net/SecureToken/) generates private/public key files in
OpenSSH format. Thus you can also use those key files created in
SecureToken directly with mToken. In any case, don't forget to add the
public key to server's public key list file! (Since managing public key
list file differs from server to server, please consult your SSH server
manual for accurate information.)
 Thank you.
 Best regards,
 Support Team (support@choung.net)
 Choung Networks | http://www.choung.net/
 *getting SSH to work with my PocketPC:*

-  install mToken

-  In order to use private/public keys, they must exist in pairs under
   "ssh\_keys" directory (in my documents>mtoken>ssh\_keys), so
   MOVE authorized\_keys form eddie(/home/zeltak.ssh/authorized\_keys)
   and the private key (id\_dsa) from any client (voices)

-  The public key file ( authorized\_keys on eddie) must have a ".pub"
   file extension. For example, if the private key file is named
   "my\_ssh\_key", the public key *must* be "my\_ssh\_key.pub". I
   reccomend renaming the file authorized\_keys to my\_ssh\_key.pub
   anyway to simplify!

  

-  the private key (id\_dsa) can be renamed my\_ssh\_key without the pub
   extension

*** dropbox

**** create a symlink using dropboxifier

[[tech_files/img/SS-2011-11-08_09.30.17.png]]
 *to use:*
 First input the folder you want the windows link to point to
 NOTE: you can have different sub folders (not just the main dropbox
folder) each time select the folder you need in the *dropbox folder*
 then enter the *name of the folder* to be created and the *path of the
original folder* (where a link will no be created instead of the folder
which will be moved to the specified dropbox folder)

*** total commander

**** lynx like movment

cursor movement mode of Total Commander
 New cursor movement mode in the [Configuration] region
     Menu -> Configuration -> Change Settings Files Directly
     Edit c:\windows\WINCMD.INI
     add the following line (note: not insert after this line [left]
...)
 [Configuration]
 SpecialCursorMovement=3
 [left]
 *
 manual*
 New cursor movement mode. Sum of the following:
    1: Left key jumps to first file, right key to last
    2: Left key goes one directory up, right key opens directory/archive
under cursor.
    4: Override horizontal scrollbar in custom columns view. If this
option isn't set, the cursor will jump only to the first file if the
horizontal scrollbar is already at the leftmost position.
    8: Jump one page up/down instead of jumping to the first/last file
     (from the official HELP file -> title: Settings in the file
wincmd.ini )
     3 means
         'Left key' jumps to first file, and press twice 'Left key' will
go one directory up
         'Right key' will open directory/archive under cursor.

*** activation code

win7 home premium edition (64 bit).
 Key is DX6YX-VT4WX-2W7V2-RK6JQ-MFCYD
 ﻿One office 2010 (SP1) is waiting for you.
 Keys for office:
 JYDVV-4X4Y9-RD3PG-GXGCG-WKF83
 MCJH7-RQH6B-KB2GD-49RTB-89TGG

** htpc

*** xbmc

**** general info

*location of logs files for xbmc
*
 ~/.xbmc/temp/
  it will be called xbmc.log the xbmc-old.log is fromt he previous time
you ran it

**** banner-fanart tips

*to refresh all fanart
*delete /.xbmc/userdata/Thumbnails/XXX*X**Default size of banners in
XBMC
*758x140
 Folder artwork in xbmcfolder.jpeg is used for banner/season/folder view
 fanart.jpeg is used for fanart/wall
  Examples for User-Defined Thumbnails:
 Single Video File
 The following example "videofilename.avi" will now use the thumbnail
"videofilename.tbn".
 Videos\path\videofilename.tbn
 Videos\path\videofilename.avi
 TV Show Season Thumbnail
 In the following example, the thumbnail will be used for the
appropriate season in the Video Library season node. Where xx is 01, 02
etc.
 TV\showfolder\seasonxx.tbn
 Multi Part (Stacked) Movie Files
 You can either use the filename of the first file in the stack or the
name of the stack, so for:
 Movies\path\moviename-CD1.avi
 Movies\path\moviename-CD2.avi
 Either of the below would work:
 Movies\path\moviename-CD1.tbn
 Movies\path\moviename.tbn
 The same goes for playlists, and internet-stream files, example:
 Playlists\path\videoplaylistname.pls
 Playlists\path\videoplaylistname.tbn
 Streams\path\videostreamname.strm
 Streams\path\videostreamname.tbn
 Thumnails and folder icons info - XBMC Wiki
 Thumbnailing Individual Items in a Single Directory
 Name the icon file the same as the file you would like it to display
for with a .tbn extension ie: Transformers.avi, Transformers.tbn. This
is particularly useful for using custom thumbnails for movies.
 Example:
 Movies\path\moviename.avi
 Movies\path\moviename.tbn
 Folder Thumbnails
 If you store each of your media files in separate subfolders to keep
things organized, you can also make the folder have a custom thumbnail
image. To do this you eiter need to save your JPG/PNG thumbnail as
folder.jpg and place it inside your movie/album folder, or you can save
it as <foldername>.tbn and place it at the same level as the folder in
the directory tree.
     * Remember, XBMC first checks for <foldername>.tbn before checking
for folder.jpg.
     * Some documentation suggests that folder.tbn can be used. In
general folder.jpg is superior as it is detected during a scan i.e. XBMC
will correctly use folder.jpg but not folder.tbn.
     * Note that folder.jpg MUST be named .jpg, even if it is a .png
format image.
 Examples:
 Movies\path\foldername\
 Movies\path\foldername.tbn
 or
 Movies\path\moviename\folder.jpg
 Music\path\album\folder.jpg
 Now your media folder will have a lovely custom thumbnail-image.
 You can via advancedsettings.xml change the default filename of the
image that XBMC uses for music folders. See the <musicthumbs> tag. for
more information.
    
 Program Thumbnails
 In order to display the image displayed for a game, emulator or
application, simply rename the desired image default.tbn and place it in
the folder where the corresponding default.XBE is located.
 Music Thumbnails
 Music Thumbnails are assigned as part of a multitier process. First,
the Tag Reader runs and caches any embedded art using the album name and
album artist (or song artist, if that is all that is available). If the
album name or artist is unavailable, it is cached using the path name of
the song. This assumes, of course, that you have tag reading enabled.
 You can also use "Get Thumb" to download the album thumbnail from
allmusic.com (AMG) for a specific album/folder or do a scan of all your
music files in all shares.
 Thumbnails also get downloaded when you rip AudioCD's to your XBox with
XBMC (which is described in the Ripping CDs section).
 Recomended is that you store each of your music-albums or artists in a
separate subfolder to keep things organized. You can also of course make
the folder have a custom thumbnail image.
    
     Notes: Running a scan automatically enables 'tag reading' so
everything can be cached. Once a scan is run, all your files and their
associated thumbnails are stored in the database.
     The Album Information dialog (available from the context menu) will
allow you to choose between the cover art available for download from
allmusic.com and any user-defined thumbnail you may have.
     Press the "Get Thumb" button to bring up a choice of the local
thumbnails you have, the currently assigned thumbnail and the
allmusic.com thumbnail.
 The code which assigns thumbnails to files runs and assigns thumbnails
in the following order:
 1) Cached Album Thumbnail
     This is all the embedded album art read by the tag reader and
cached using the album name and album artist.
 2) Cached filename.tbn
     This includes an embedded thumbnail cached with the fully qualified
name.
 3) Remote filename.tbn
     This is a filename.tbn on a remote share/folder which is then
cached.
 4) Cached folder.jpg
     This is a folder.jpg which is cached based off the folder path.
 5) Remote folder.jpg
     This is a folder.jpg on a remote share/folder which is then cached.
 6) Remote foldername.tbn
     This is a foldername.tbn on a remote share/folder which is then
cached.
 Examples:
 In this example audiofilename.mp3 will use audiofilename.tbn as
thumbnail:
 Music\path\audiofilename.mp3
 Music\path\audiofilename.tbn
 The same goes for playlists, cue-sheets, SHOUTcast, and internet-stream
files, example:
 Music\path\audioplaylistname.m3u
 Music\path\audioplaylistname.tbn
 Music\path\cuelistname.cue
 Music\path\cuelistname.mp3
 Music\path\cuelistname.tbn
 Music\path\shoutcastlinkname.pls
 Music\path\shoutcastlinkname.tbn
 Music\path\audiostreamname.strm
 Music\path\audiostreamname.tbn
 Video Thumbnails
 You can either use your own custom thumbnails or XBMC can retreive
video thumbnails from the internet via scrapers and cache them.
 XBMC applies thumbnails to video files in the following order:
 1) Cached Thumbnail
     Thumbnails are cached to UserData\Thumbnails\Video using the CRC of
the path of the file or folder.
 2) User-Defined Thumbnail
     For files: XBMC checks for <filename>.tbn and uses that if it
exists.The thumbnail is cached the first time it is read.
 For movies, movie.tbn will override any other thumb.
     For folders: XBMC first checks for <foldername>.tbn in the same
directory as the folder is in. If no <foldername>.tbn exists XBMC then
checks for folder.jpg inside the movie-folder. In either case the first
found thumb of those is cached.
    
 Examples for User-Defined Thumbnails
 Single Video File
 The following example "videofilename.avi" will now use the thumbnail
"videofilename.tbn".
 Videos\path\videofilename.tbn
 Videos\path\videofilename.avi
 Multi Part (Stacked) Video Files
 You can either use the filename of the first file in the stack or the
name of the stack, so for:
 Movies\path\moviename-CD1.avi
 Movies\path\moviename-CD2.avi
 Either of the below would work:
 Movies\path\moviename-CD1.tbn
 Movies\path\moviename.tbn
 Movie
 If content has been set to Movies, movie.tbn will override any other
thumbs for media in that folder. In he following example
"videofilename.avi" will now use the thumbnail "movie.tbn".
 Videos\path\movie.tbn
 Videos\path\videofilename.avi
 TV Show Season Thumbnails
 In the following example, the thumbnail will be used for the
appropriate season in the Video Library season node. Where xx is 01, 02
etc.
 TV\showfolder\seasonxx.tbn
 For specials:
 TV\showfolder\season-specials.tbn
 For the all seasons item:
 TV\showfolder\season-all.tbn
 Playlist and internet-stream file examples:
 Playlists\path\videoplaylistname.pls
 Playlists\path\videoplaylistname.tbn
 Streams\path\videostreamname.strm
 Streams\path\videostreamname.tbn
 Picture Thumbnails
 XBMC applies thumbnails to picture files in the following order:
 1) Cached Thumbnail
     Thumbnails are cached to UserData\Thumbnails\Pictures using the CRC
of the path of the file or folder.
 2) Images
     EXIF thumbnail in JPEG images are then read. If no EXIF thumbnail
is available, XBMC will load the image and generate a thumbnail from the
image. These are then cached.
 3) Folders
     <MyHolidayPictures>\folder.jpg is checked first. If that file
doesn't exist, XBMC will generate a thumbnail from up to 4 random images
inside that folder.
 Thumbnails for Sources
 You can change the thumbnail displayed for a source by editing
UserData\sources.xml.
 Note: Source thumbnails have to be in a folder on the local Xbox
harddrive!
 Simply modify your source as shown:
  
 <source>
    <name>Music</name>
    <path>xbms://192.168.1.100:1400/Music/</path>
    <thumbnail>F:\Apps\XBMC\thumbs\shares\thumb.png</thumbnail>
 </source>
 Auto Switch to Icon Mode
 XBMC tries to automatically switch to Large Icon view when the View
Mode is set to Auto in the Settings. It first checks if the skin has
Large Icon view, failing that switches to Icon view. If neither is
available it goes for List View.
 The rules are as follows:
 Programs
 Auto switches to Icon view when 50% of all the items (files and folder)
have thumbs.
 Pictures
 Auto switches to Thumbs view when the list contains more than 25%
files. (In the case of Pictures, all items have thumbs as they are
generated upon entering the folder.)
 Videos
 Auto switches to Thumb view when 50% of all the items (files and
folder) have thumbs.
 Music
 Auto switches to Thumb view when the list contains at least 75% folders
and at least 50% of them have thumbs. (Remember that playlist files like
m3u, pls, etc, are treated as folders by default)
 Hashing
 The thumbnail .tbn file is created via a hashing function. As explained
earlier, the hash is based off the CRC32 of the pathname (plus filename)
in lowercase. Files which are local are hashed using their drive letter.
Remote files are hashed using the smb:// protocol designation and
optional username and password.
 Examples
     * 123456789 returns 0376e6e7
     * F:\Videos\Nosferatu.avi returns 2a6ec78d
     * smb://user:pass@server/share/directory/ returns c5559f13
     * smb://user:pass@server/share/directory/file.ext returns 8ce36055
 Remember:
     * When hashing remote shares, use the path as displayed in the
sources.xml file, which can include the username and password.
     * When hashing directories for thumbnails, include the final slash.
 Sample Code
 The following code is written in C# and produces the same output as the
XBMC hashing function.
 public string Hash(string input)
 {
    uint m\_crc = 0xffffffff;
    System.Text.ASCIIEncoding encoding = new
System.Text.ASCIIEncoding();
    bytes = encoding.GetBytes(input.ToLower());
    foreach (byte myByte in bytes)
    {
        m\_crc \^= ((uint)(myByte) << 24);
        for (int i = 0; i < 8; i++)
        {
            if ((System.Convert.ToUInt32(m\_crc) & 0x80000000) ==
0x80000000)
            {
                m\_crc = (m\_crc << 1) \^ 0x04C11DB7;
            }
            else
            {
                m\_crc <<= 1;
            }
        }
    }
    return String.Format("{0:x8}", m\_crc);

**** advanced settings

*Zeltaks Example for Video skip timea
*
 <advancedsettings>
 <video>
  <smallstepbackseconds>5</smallstepbackseconds>
  <smallstepbacktries>5</smallstepbacktries>
  <smallstepbackdelay>300</smallstepbackdelay>
  <usetimeseeking>true</usetimeseeking>
  <timeseekforward>15</timeseekforward>
  <timeseekbackward>-10</timeseekbackward>
  <timeseekforwardbig>180</timeseekforwardbig>
  <timeseekbackwardbig>-60</timeseekbackwardbig>
  <playcountminimumpercent>75</playcountminimumpercent>
 </video>
 </advancedsettings>
 *advancedsettings.xml - XBMC Wiki
*
 The "advancedsettings.xml" file, which does not exist by default, may
be created by a user in their "\UserData\" folder.
 Please consult your plaform specific FAQ for the appropriate location.
 This file can contain additional settings and pre-defined values for
the settings available in the GUI (thus removing them from the GUI
settings screens).
 "advancedsettings.xml" is useful for advanced/expert users and for
installers.
     NOTE! This file will not exist unless created by the end-user,
meaning YOU!
 The XBMC software will never write to this file, so any settings you
define will not be overwritten by any XBMC GUI settings.
 So you can only edit this file manually on your computer, via a
text-editor (like Notepad in Windows or a XML-editor).
 All the settings available outside of the GUI are documented on this
page.
 NOTE: This file is CaSe SeNsItIvE and must contain the
<advancedsettings> tag (see the layout section below), so make sure you
use all lower-case tags or they will not be read properly by XBMC.
 Contents
     * 1 Layout
     * 2 List of available settings
           o 2.1 <loglevel>
           o 2.2 <cddbaddress>
           o 2.3 <nodvdrom>
           o 2.4 <usepcdvdrom>
           o 2.5 <detectasudf>
           o 2.6 <disablemodchipdetection>
           o 2.7 <cachepath>
           o 2.8 <virtualshares>
           o 2.9 <pictureextensions>
           o 2.10 <musicextensions>
           o 2.11 <videoextensions>
           o 2.12 <languagecodes>
           o 2.13 <sorttokens>
           o 2.14 <samba>
           o 2.15 <moviestacking>
           o 2.16 <tvshowmatching>
           o 2.17 <excludefromscan/excludefromlisting>
           o 2.18 <pathsubstitution>
           o 2.19 <forcedswaptime>
           o 2.20 <playlistasfolders>
           o 2.21 <playlistretries>
           o 2.22 <playlisttimeout>
           o 2.23 <songinfoduration>
           o 2.24 <remoterepeat>
           o 2.25 <controllerdeadzone>
           o 2.26 <displayremotecodes>
           o 2.27 <thumbsize>
           o 2.28 <musicthumbs>
           o 2.29 <musicfilenamefilters>
           o 2.30 <dvdthumbs>
           o 2.31 <masterlock>
           o 2.32 <postprocessing>
           o 2.33 <audio>
           o 2.34 <video>
           o 2.35 <musiclibrary>
           o 2.36 <videolibrary>
           o 2.37 <slideshow>
           o 2.38 <lcd>
           o 2.39 <network>
           o 2.40 <tuxbox>
           o 2.41 <playcountminimumpercent>
           o 2.42 <ftpshowcache>
           o 2.43 <screensaver>
           o 2.44 <busydialogdelay>
           o 2.45 <rootovershoot>
           o 2.46 <hosts>
           o 2.47 <fullscreen>
           o 2.48 <navigatevirtualkeyboard>
           o 2.49 <cputempcommand>
           o 2.50 <gputempcommand>
           o 2.51 <glrectanglehack>
     * 3 How to include GUI settings
           o 3.1 <trainerpath>
           o 3.2 <recordingpath>
           o 3.3 <cddaripperpath>
           o 3.4 <playlistspath>
           o 3.5 <screenshotpath>
 Layout
 The layout of advancedsettings.xml is as follows:
  
 <advancedsettings>
     <setting>value</setting>
     ...
     <setting>value</setting>
 </advancedsettings>
 where "setting" gives the name of the setting, and "value" gives it's
value.
 A list of the available "setting" strings and their values is given
below.
 List of available settings
 <loglevel>
 The logging level that XBMC will use to log errors and information.
Available values are:
     * -1 No logging, suppresses all log output.
     * 0 Normal logging, only logging errors (Default)
     * 1 Debug logging.
     * 2 Debug logging with freemem, fps and cpu usage shown on screen.
     * 3 Debug logging with freemem, fps and cpu usage and full smb
logging.
 <cddbaddress>
 The address of the online CDDb database. You may set this to another
freedb mirror if there is a more suitable one. Defaults to
freedb.freedb.org
 <nodvdrom>
 Set to true if you have no DVD-ROM drive in your XBox, or if it's
broken. Defaults to false.
 <usepcdvdrom>
 Set to true if you have replaced the XBox DVD-ROM drive with a standard
PC DVD-ROM. Expect performance to be somewhat variable. Defaults to
false.
 removed for non XBox builds with r14123.
 <detectasudf>
 Set to true if you wish to detect joint ISO9660/UDF disks as UDF.
Defaults to false.
 <disablemodchipdetection>
 Set to true to disable modchip detection. This is required for X2 chips
to launch XBEs.
 <cachepath>
 Set to the path on the XBox Harddisk that XBMC should use for when it
caches files (such as when caching subtitles or for unzipping or
unrarring). Defaults to Z:\
 <virtualshares>
 Set to false to disable virtual shares like plugin, last.fm or
shoutcast sources. Defaults to true.
 <pictureextensions>
 A list of additional file-extensions to allow (add) or exclude (remove)
in the My Pictures window.
 These are the current default extensions for PICTURES:
 .png .jpg .jpeg .bmp .gif .ico .tif .tiff .tga .pcx .cbz .zip .cbr .rar
.m3u
  
 <pictureextensions>
   <add>.ex1|.ex2</add>
   <remove>.ex3|.ex4</remove>
 </pictureextensions>
 <musicextensions>
 A list of additional file-extensions to allow (add) or exclude (remove)
in the My Music windows.
 These are the current default extensions for MUSIC:
 .nsv .m4a .flac .aac .strm .pls .rm .mpa .wav .wma .ogg .mp3 .mp2 .m3u
.mod .amf .669 .dmf .dsm .far .gdm .imf .it .m15 .med .okt .s3m .stm
.sfx .ult .uni .xm .sid .ac3 .dts .cue .aif .aiff .wpl .ape .mac .mpc
.mp+ .mpp .shn .zip .rar .wv .nsf .spc .gym .adplug .adx .dsp .adp .ymf
.ast .afc .hps .xsp
  
 <musicextensions>
   <add>.ex1|.ex2</add>
   <remove>.ex3|.ex4</remove>
 </musicextensions>
 <videoextensions>
 A list of additional file-extensions to allow (add) or exclude (remove)
in the My Video windows.
 These are the current default extensions for VIDEOS:
 .m4v .3gp .nsv .ts .ty .strm .rm .rmvb .m3u .ifo .mov .qt .divx .xvid
.bivx .vob .nrg .img .iso .pva .wmv .asf .asx .ogm .m2v .avi .bin .dat
.dvr-ms .mpg .mpeg .mp4 .mkv .avc .vp3 .svq3 .nuv .viv .dv .fli .flv
.rar .001 .wpl .zip
  
 <videoextensions>
   <add>.ex1|.ex2</add>
   <remove>.ex3|.ex4</remove>
 </videoextensions>
 <languagecodes>
 Translation table for subtitle and audio names. Contains entries of the
form
  
     <code><short>alt</short><long>Alternate</long></code>
 <sorttokens>
 Allows you to specify additional tokens that will be ignored at the
start of lines during sorting.
  
   <sorttokens>
     <token>the</token>
   </sorttokens>
 <samba>
  
 <samba>
    <doscodepage></doscodepage> <!-- code page to use for filenames -->
    <clienttimeout>10</clienttimeout> <!-- timeout (in seconds) -->
    <statfiles>true</statfiles> <!-- Set to false to disable smb stat()
on files to speed up listings of large directories (over slow links) -->
 </samba>
 <moviestacking>
 This tag used to be called <videostacking>.
 Contains "Regular Expression" syntax (commonly refered to as "RegEx" or
"RegExp") for use in matching filenames in a "stack" of video files. The
regular expression must have a (...) surrounding the volume label
portion. Text matching is compared case-insensitive. Anything matched by
the regular expression will be removed from the titlename. If more than
one (...) section is used, the first one will be the prefix, the second
one the volume label, and the third one (if it exists) will be the
suffix. Use this to keep extensions after matching. If more than one
expression matches a particular filename, the first one will be used.
 Default stacking:
  
   <moviestacking>
     <regexp>[ \_\.-]+cd[ \_\.-]*([0-9a-d]+)</regexp>
     <regexp>[ \_\.-]+dvd[ \_\.-]*([0-9a-d]+)</regexp>
     <regexp>[ \_\.-]+part[ \_\.-]*([0-9a-d]+)</regexp>
     <regexp>[ \_\.-]+dis[ck][ \_\.-]*([0-9a-d]+)</regexp>
     <regexp>()[ \_\.-]+([0-9]*[abcd]+)(\.....?)$</regexp>
     <regexp>([a-z])([0-9]+)(\.....?)$</regexp>
     <regexp>()([ab])(\.....?)$</regexp>
   </moviestacking>
 If the argument action="append" or append="yes" is supplied, the
default videostacking regular expressions will remain intact and the
user specified ones will be added to the end. Example:
  
   <moviestacking action="append">
     <regexp>custom[ \_\.-]*([0-9a-d]+)</regexp>
   </moviestacking>
 If the argument action="prepend" is supplied, the default videostacking
regular expressions will remain intact and the user specified ones will
be added to the beginning. Example:
  
   <moviestacking action="prepend">
     <regexp>custom[ \_\.-]*([0-9a-d]+)</regexp>
   </moviestacking>
 If no argument is supplied, or the argument append="no" is supplied,
the default videostacking regular expressions are overwritten by the
user specified ones.
 <tvshowmatching>
 Contains "Regular Expression" syntax (commonly refered to as "RegEx" or
"RegExp") to match the season and episode numbers in filenames. Text
matching is compared case-insensitive.
 Default stacking:
  
   <tvshowmatching>
     <regexp>\[[Ss]([0-9]+)\]\_\[[Ee]([0-9]+)([\^\\/]*)</regexp> <!--
foo\_[s01]\_[e01] -->
     <regexp>[\.\_ \-]([0-9]+)x([0-9]+)([\^\\/]*)</regexp> <!-- foo.1x09
-->
     <regexp>[\.\_ \-][Ss]([0-9]+)[\.\-]?[Ee]([0-9]+)([\^\\/]*)</regexp>
<!-- foo, s01e01, foo.s01.e01, foo.s01-e01 -->
     <regexp>[\.\_ \-]([0-9]+)([0-9][0-9])([\.\_ \-][\^\\/]*)</regexp>
<!-- foo.103 -->
   </tvshowmatching>
 The "append" and "action" arguments described in the videostacking
section work the same for tvshowmatching tags. Examples of matching
regexps for certain filenames can be found on the TV\_Shows page.
 NOTE: for multi-episode matching to work, there needs to be a third set
of parentheses on the end. This part is fed back into the regexp engine.
 <excludefromscan/excludefromlisting>
 Contains regular expressions to match filenames or folders which should
be excluded from a library scan. This can be for both Video or Audio
sections of advancedsettings.xml.
 Default excludes:
  
  <video>
   <excludefromscan>
     <regexp>[-\.\_ ](sample|trailer)[-\.\_ ]</regexp>
   </excludefromscan>
  </video>
 The "append" and "action" arguments described in the videostacking
section work the same for excludefromscan tags.
 <pathsubstitution>
 Path substitutions for use with playlist loading. These are processed
in order, and are useful for substituting an absolute path on a PC with
a path suitable for XBMC to handle. Default is no path substitutions
defined. An example is:
  
   <pathsubstitution>
     <substitute>
       <from>G:\dvds\</from>
       <to>smb://somecomputer/g-share/dvds/</to>
     </substitute>
   </pathsubstitution>
 <forcedswaptime>
 Use to force a backbuffer->frontbuffer swap while vsync is enabled. Set
to the time (in ms) to allow for the swap (eg
<forcedswaptime>1</forcedswaptime> is typical). It defaults off.
 <playlistasfolders>
 In the recent releases, playlists are treated as folders. Selecting a
playlist no longer plays it, but opens it, as if it were a folder.
 Set to false to revert to the previous behavior. When you select a
playlist, its content is added to the list of elements to be played.
 NOTE! This setting will not affect smart playlists, they will always
show as folders.
 <playlistretries>
 The default number of retries if for example a source is offline is
100. With this control you can alter the number of consecutive failed
items before a playlist fails.
  
   <playlistretries>100</playlistretries>
 <playlisttimeout>
 The default timeout before item failure is 20 sec. It can be changed
with this control
  
   <playlisttimeout>20</playlisttimeout>
 <songinfoduration>
 This controls how long the song information will remain onscreen when
the song changes during visualisations. The valid range is 1 to 15, in
seconds. This does not include the duration of any transition effects.
(The default is 2 seconds.)
  
   <songinfoduration>10</songinfoduration>
 <remoterepeat>
 The repeat delay for the Infrared remote control, in milliseconds.
Length of time a remote button needs to be held before it will start
repeating (ie continuously sending button pushes while it's held down).
Defaults to 480.
 <controllerdeadzone>
 Deadzone for controller thumb sticks. 0 indicates no deadzone at all. 1
indicates all deadzone (ie no movement will be detected). Defaults to
0.2
 <displayremotecodes>
 Set to true to have XBMC display the Infrared Remote's button codes
(OBC's) on screen when you press buttons. Useful for assigning functions
to the buttons on a universal remote control. Defaults to false. Affects
only XBox.
 <thumbsize>
 Size of the square in pixels that XBMC will use to cache thumbnail
images. If the thumb is smaller than this size it will be cached as-is.
If it is larger it will be scaled so that the number of pixels is less
than a square of this value. Default is 512 (192 on xbox), which refers
to 512x512 = 262144 (for XBox 192x192 = 36864) pixels in total. The
thumbnail will be cached at using the same aspect ratio as the original
image, using up to 262144 (for XBox 36864) pixels.
 <musicthumbs>
 A list of additional files to try when searching for music thumbnail
images. (The default is folder.jpg which can be removed.)
  
 <musicthumbs>
   <remove>folder.jpg</remove>
   <add>thumb.jpg|cover.jpg</add>
 </musicthumbs>
 <musicfilenamefilters>
 Contains filters to match music information (artist, title etc.) from a
tagless music filename. The first <filter> to match completely is used.
Matched items include:
 %A - Artist %T - Title %B - Album %N - Track number %S - Part of set
(disk number) %D - Duration %G - Genre %Y - Year %R - Rating
  
   <musicfilenamefilters>
     <filter>%A - %T</filter>
   </musicfilenamefilters>
 <dvdthumbs>
 A list of additional files to try when searching for dvdrom thumbnail
images. (The default is folder.jpg which can be removed.)
  
 <dvdthumbs>
   <remove>folder.jpg</remove>
   <add>thumb.jpg|cover.jpg</add>
 </dvdthumbs>
 <masterlock>
 If you enable any masterlock settings below, they will be removed from
UI. Code needs to be MD5'd, and you can use this site to hash it.
  
  
 <masterlock>
    <startuplock>false</startuplock> <!-- true prompts user for code
upon startup -->
    <enableshutdown>false</enableshutdown> <!-- true shuts down xbox
after 3 failed attempts to enter correct code -->
    <automastermode>false</automastermode> <!-- automatically enters
master mode if the master code is given -->
    <loginlock>true</loginlock> <!-- whether to use locks on login
screen or not -->
    <!-- advancedsettings.xml ONLY: -->
    <maxretries>3<maxretries> <!-- enter the max number of retries to
input code, 3 is default. -->
 </masterlock>
 <postprocessing>
 MPlayer postprocessing settings. This is unreliable, and so they're in
here only.
  
   <postprocessing>
     <enable>false</enable> <!-- enable/disable postprocessing -->
     <auto>true</auto> <!-- auto filter settings (overrides the below)
-->
     <verticaldeblocking>false</verticaldeblocking> <!-- use vertical
deblocking -->
     <verticaldeblocklevel>0</verticaldeblocklevel> <!-- level of
vertical deblocking (0-100) -->
     <horizontaldeblocking>false</horizontaldeblocking> <!-- use
horizontal deblocking -->
     <horizontaldeblocklevel>0</horizontaldeblocklevel> <!-- level of
horizontal deblocking (0-100) -->
     <autobrightnesscontrastlevels>false</autobrightnesscontrastlevels>
<!-- whether to use mplayers colour balancing -->
     <dering>false</dering> <!-- whether to apply the dering filter -->
   </postprocessing>
 <audio>
  
 <audio>
   <!-- Amount of headroom XBMC should use above the maximum volume
level, in decibels. Defaults to 0, valid values 0, 6, 12. -->
   <headroom>0</headroom>
   <!-- Delay in sync to karaoke in seconds. Valid values are
-3.0...3.0. -->
   <karaokesyncdelay>0</karaokesyncdelay>
   <!-- Default audio player: paplayer or dvdplayer (or mplayer on Xbox)
-->
   <defaultplayer>paplayer</defaultplayer>
   <excludefromscan> <!-- Regular expressions that if evaluated to true
won't be added to library. -->
     <regexp>[-\.\_ ](podcast)[-\.\_ ]</regexp>
   </excludefromscan>
   <excludefromlisting> <!-- Regular expressions that if evaluated to
true won't be displayed in Files View -->
     <regexp>[-\.\_ ](podcast)[-\.\_ ]</regexp>
   </excludefromlisting>
 </audio>
 <video>
  
 <video> <!-- "VideoSettings" instead of "video" for builds prior to May
22, 2006 -->
   <subsdelayrange>10</subsdelayrange> <!-- Delay range for subtitles,
in seconds. -->
   <audiodelayrange>10</audiodelayrange> <!-- Delay range for
audio/video sync, in seconds. -->
   <smallstepbackseconds>7</smallstepbackseconds> <!-- Length of the
small skip back (normally the BACK button) when playing a video -->
   <smallstepbacktries>3</smallstepbacktries>
   <smallstepbackdelay>300</smallstepbackdelay>
   <usetimeseeking>true</usetimeseeking> <!-- Whether to use time based
or percentage based seeking. -->
   <timeseekforward>30</timeseekforward> <!-- Time to seek forward in
seconds when doing a short seek. Defaults to 30. -->
   <timeseekbackward>-30</timeseekbackward> <!-- Time to seek backward
in seconds when doing a short seek. Defaults to -30. -->
   <timeseekforwardbig>600</timeseekforwardbig> <!-- Time to seek
forward in seconds when doing a long seek. Defaults to 600 (10 minutes).
-->
   <timeseekbackwardbig>-600</timeseekbackwardbig> <!-- Time to seek
forward in seconds when doing a long seek. Defaults to -600 (10
minutes). -->
   <percentseekforward>2</percentseekforward> <!-- Amount to seek
forward as a percentage, when doing a short seek. Defaults to 2. -->
   <percentseekbackward>-2</percentseekbackward> <!-- Amount to seek
backward as a percentage, when doing a short seek. Defaults to -2. -->
   <percentseekforwardbig>10</percentseekforwardbig> <!-- Amount to seek
forward as a percentage, when doing a long seek. Defaults to 10. -->
   <percentseekbackwardbig>-10</percentseekbackwardbig> <!-- Amount to
seek forward as a percentage, when doing a long seek. Defaults to -10.
-->
   <blackbarcolour>1</blackbarcolour> <!-- colour of the black bars
(0->255), (black->white) on videos. -->
   <fullscreenonmoviestart>true</fullscreenonmoviestart> <!-- Whether to
go to fullscreen or not when starting a movie. Defaults to true. -->
   <defaultplayer>mplayer</defaultplayer> <!-- Set the default video
player: mplayer or dvdplayer (xbox only) / dvdplayer or extplayer
(others). -->
   <excludefromscan> <!-- Regular expressions that if evaluated to true
won't be added to library. -->
     <regexp>[-\.\_ ](sample|trailer)[-\.\_ ]</regexp>
   </excludefromscan>
   <excludefromlisting> <!-- Regular expressions that if evaluated to
true won't be displayed in Files View -->
     <regexp>[-\.\_ ](sample|trailer)[-\.\_ ]</regexp>
   </excludefromlisting>
 </video> <!-- use "VideoSettings" instead of "video" for builds prior
to May 22, 2006 -->
 <musiclibrary>
 Options specific to the Music Library
  
   <musiclibrary>
     <hideallitems>true</hideallitems> <!-- removes the "*All" items
from the music library -->
     <allitemsonbottom>true</allitemsonbottom> <!-- sorts the "*All"
items at the bottom of the list when in Ascending order -->
     <!-- only shows primary album artists when at the unfiltered artist
listing -->
     <hidecompilationartists>true</hidecompilationartists>
     <!-- at an albums listing, when you sort by artist, secondary sort
will be year. -->
     <albumssortbyartistthenyear>true</albumssortbyartistthenyear>
     <albumformat>%B - %Y</albumformat> <!-- album label template,
default is "%B" -->
     <albumformatright>%A</albumformatright> <!-- album label template
for right column, default is "%A" -->
     <prioritiseapetags>true</prioritiseapetags> <!-- prioritise APEv2
tags over ID3v1/2 tags, default is false. -->
     <!-- separator used for multiple artists/genres in tags. Note, this
*space* *slash* *space* -->
     <itemseparator> / </itemseparator>
   </musiclibrary>
 <videolibrary>
 Options specific to the Video Library
  
   <videolibrary>
     <allitemsonbottom>true</allitemsonbottom> <!-- sorts the "*All"
items at the bottom of the list when in Ascending order -->
     <backgroundupdate>true</backgroundupdate> <!-- set to hide the
video scanner dialog from the gui -->
     <cleanonupdate>true</cleanonupdate> <!-- set to false to prevent
xbmc from removing items from the database while updating -->
     <hideallitems>true</hideallitems> <!-- removes the "*All" items
from the video library -->
     <hideemptyseries>true</hideemptyseries> <!-- hide empty series in
the video library -->
     <hiderecentlyaddeditems>true</hiderecentlyaddeditems> <!-- removes
the "Recently added ..." items from the video library. -->
     <itemseparator> / </itemseparator> <!-- separator used for multiple
artists/genres in tags. Note, this is *space* *slash* *space* -->
   </videolibrary>
 <slideshow>
  
 <slideshow>
   <!-- Amount to pan images as a percentage of the screen -->
   <panamount>2.5</panamount>
   <!-- Amount to zoom images as a percentage of the screen -->
   <zoomamount>5.0</zoomamount>
   <!-- Amount to compensate (zoom) images to attempt to reduce black
bars. -->
   <!-- Results in cropping of the longer length of the image in order
to reduce the black bars on the shorter length of the image. -->
   <!-- Defaults to 20. -->
   <blackbarcompensation>20</blackbarcompensation>
 </slideshow>
 <lcd>
  
 <lcd>
   <rows>4</rows> <!-- Number of rows to use for the LCD. -->
   <columns>20</columns> <!-- Number of columns to use for the LCD. -->
   <address1>0</address1> <!-- Memory address for row 1. -->
   <address2>20</address2> <!-- Memory address for row 2. -->
   <address3>64</address3> <!-- Memory address for row 3. -->
   <address4>84</address4> <!-- Memory address for row 4. -->
   <heartbeat>true</heartbeat> <!-- Enables LCDprocs heartbeat symbol.
Defaults to false. -->
   <scrolldelay>2</scrolldelay> <!-- Delay of the scroller widget.
Defaults to 1. -->
 </lcd>
 <network>
  
 <network>
   <autodetectpingtime>30</autodetectpingtime> <!-- Length in seconds
between pinging the network to detect new xbox's -->
   <curlclienttimeout>10</curlclienttimeout> <!-- Timeout in seconds for
libcurl (http/ftp) connections -->
   <curllowspeedtime>5</curllowspeedtime> <!-- Time in seconds for
libcurl to consider a connection lowspeed -->
   <httpproxyusername></httpproxyusername> <!-- username for Basic Proxy
Authentication -->
   <httpproxypassword></httpproxypassword> <!-- password for Basic Proxy
Authentication -->
 </network>
 <tuxbox>
  
  <tuxbox>
     <!-- "audiochannelselection"; default is 'false', 'true' will popup
the audio channel selection if
           there is more then one audio stream !-->
     <audiochannelselection>false</audiochannelselection>
     <!-- "submenuselection"; default is 'false', 'true' will popup the
Submenu selection !-->
     <submenuselection>false</submenuselection>
     <!-- "defaultrootmenu"; MODE: 0 = TV (Default), 1 = Radio, 2 =
Data, 3 = Movies, 4 = Root !-->
     <defaultrootmenu>0</defaultrootmenu>
     <!-- "defaultsubmenu"; 1=Services 2=Satellites 3=Providers
4=Bouquets (default) !-->
     <defaultsubmenu>4</defaultsubmenu>
     <!-- "pictureicon"; default is 'true', will use the Picture Icons
from folder /UserData/PictureIcon/ !-->
     <pictureicon>true</pictureicon>
     <!-- "epgrequesttime"; default is '10', 0-3600, defines the time in
seconds between epg queries, some tuxbox
           devices need longer to response (Minimum: 1, Maximum: 3600)
!-->
     <epgrequesttime>10</epgrequesttime>
     <!-- "zapwaittime"; default is '0' (0 = OFF), defines the time in
seconds to wait for a valid PMT after the
           zaping was send (Minimum: 0, Maximum: 120) !-->
     <zapwaittime>0</zapwaittime>
   </tuxbox>
 <playcountminimumpercent>
 Video: Minimum percentage that has to be played before it is marked as
watched.
 Music: Minimum percentage that has to be played before it is considered
for incrementing in the Top 100 database view, or for last.fm submittal.
 <ftpshowcache>
 default is false, if set to true, shows cache (X Y Z) partitions in the
root directory listing
 <screensaver>
 To avoid potential worries of plasma screen burn-in, you can set the
Dim screensaver fade level to 0% here or in the Settings.
  
 <screensaver>
   <dimlevel>0</dimlevel> <!-- This will remove the Fade Level control
from the settings screen altogether -->
 </screensaver>
 <busydialogdelay>
 Set the delay in milliseconds before the busydialog pops up (default
2000).
  
 <busydialogdelay>2000</busydialogdelay>
 <rootovershoot>
 Disable root overshooting aka evil B(tm) navigation. 'Evil B'
navigation refers to the 'previous folder' action returning to the
parent window from the root location of a media window. Sometimes a user
would just want to repeatedly hit the B button to reach the root
location without worrying of overshooting to the previous window. For
this you should disable evil b by setting this value to false.
  
 <rootovershoot>false</rootovershoot>
 <hosts>
 Static dns entries which take precedence over your dns server.
  
 <hosts>
   <entry name="HOSTNAME">IPADDRESS</entry>
 </hosts>
 <fullscreen>
 Starts XBMC in full screen (check resolutions!). The same as starting
XBMC with -fs.
  
 <fullscreen>false</fullscreen>
 <navigatevirtualkeyboard>
 Allows virtual keyboard navigation with remotes.
  
 <navigatevirtualkeyboard>true</navigatevirtualkeyboard> <!-- This will
activate virtual keyboard navigation, default is false -->
 <cputempcommand>
 Provide a shell command XBMC will use to get CPU temperature. It should
print out only "[temp as integer] [scale as one of"CcFf"]".
  
   <cputempcommand>sed -e 's/\([0-9]*\)[0-9]\{3\}.*/\1 C/'
/sys/class/thermal/thermal\_zone0/temp</cputempcommand>
 <gputempcommand>
 Provide a shell command XBMC will use to get GPU temperature. It should
print out only "[temp as integer] [scale as one of"CcFf"]".
  
   <gputempcommand>echo "$(nvidia-settings -tq gpuCoreTemp)
C"</gputempcommand>
 <glrectanglehack>
 Problems with ghosting or videos which are only played back in the left
upper quarter? The following ATI hack may solve it.
  
   <glrectanglehack>yes</glrectanglehack>
 How to include GUI settings
 You can also define the settings normally defined in the GUI in
advancedsettings.xml. Any GUI based settings defined in
advancedsettings.xml will override the GUI values, and the settings will
be removed completely from the GUI (ie only alterable by editting
advancedsettings.xml).
 The easiest way to include a GUI setting is to first make sure it is
set in the GUI to the value that you want, and then to open the
UserData\guisettings.xml file and find the XML entry that corresponds to
that setting.
 Then just add that entry to the advancedsettings.xml file.
 For instance, to set the Font Character Set for the GUI (found in the
appearance setting, in the Look and Feel section), you'd open up
guisettings.xml and find:
  
   <lookandfeel>
     <charset>Hebrew (Windows)</charset>
   </lookandfeel>
 Simply take that entry and place it in advancedsettings.xml. The GUI
entry for the character set will then no longer appear, and XBMC will
always use the Hebrew (Windows) character set.
 Here are some special cases, if they aren't defined the user will be
prompted first time he/she tries to access any of these paths:
 Note: There are no default pre-set values
 <trainerpath>
  
 <myprograms>
     <trainerpath>Q:\system\trainers</trainerpath>
 </myprograms>
 <recordingpath>
  
 <mymusic>
     <recordingpath>E:\Recordings</recordingpath>
 </mymusic>
 <cddaripperpath>
  
 <cddaripper>
     <path>E:\Recordings</path>
 </cddaripper>
 <playlistspath>
  
 <system>
     <playlistspath>E:\Playlists</playlistspath>
 </system>
 <screenshotpath>
  
 <pictures>
   <screenshotpath>E:\Screenshots</screenshotpath>
 </pictures>

**** configuring remotes

 *Jump points
*
 to jump to a video library section (tv for example)
 ActivateWindow(MyVideos,TV Shows)
 to jump to a directory in your shares (recordings for example), find
the shares name in /userdata/sources.xml and issue the command
ActivateWindow(videofiles,dir), for example
 <start>ActivateWindow(videofiles,1.Recordings)</start>
 List of most XBMC jump points
 You can [Activate a Window] or run a [Built In Function], or specify
one of the [Actions].
 Below are valid secondary parameters for the applicable Window IDs
 Example:
     * You want a button in your skin or on your remote taking you
directly to the movie listing you let that button do
  xbmc.activatewindow(videolibrary,movietitles)
 videolibrary:
 videolibrary,videodb://1/ (video library root)
 movies
 moviegenres
 movietitles
 movieyears
 movieactors
 moviedirectors
 recentlyaddedmovies
 tvshows
 tvshowgenres
 tvshowtitles
 tvshowyears
 tvshowactors
 recentlyaddedepisodes
 musicvideotitles
 usicvideos
 musicvideogenres
 musicvideodirectors
 musicvideostudios
 musicvideoartists
 recentlyaddedmusicvideos
 special://videoplaylists/
 plugin://video/
 musiclibrary:
 musiclibrary,musicdb://1/ (music library root)
 genres
 artists
 albums
 songs
 top100
 top100songs
 top100albums
 recentlyaddedalbums
 recentlyplayedalbums
 compilations
 playlists
 years
 special://musicplaylists/
 plugin://music/*XBMC Actions
*
 Action     Description
 Left    Move left off a control.
 Right    Move right off a control.
 Up    Move up off a control.
 Down    Move down off a control.
 Select    Select a button, or an item from a list of thumb view.
 PageUp    Scroll up on page in a list, thumb, or text view.
 PageDown    Scroll down on page in a list, thumb, or text view.
 Highlight    Highlight an item in a list or thumb view.
 ParentDir    Go up a folder to the parent folder.
 PreviousMenu    Go back to the previous menu screen.
 Info    Show the information about the currently highlighted item, or
currently playing item.
 Pause    Pause the currently playing item.
 Stop    Stop the currently playing item.
 SkipNext    Skip to the next item in a playlist.
 SkipPrevious    Skip to the previous item in a playlist.
 FullScreen    Toggles fullscreen modes (either visualisation or video
playback)
 AspectRatio    Toggle through the various aspect ratio modes (Normal is
the preferred option).
 StepForward    Step forward 1% in the movie.
 StepBack    Step back 1% in the movie.
 BigStepForward    Step forward 10% in the movie.
 BigStepBack    Step back 10% in the movie.
 SmallStepBack    Step back 7 seconds in the current video.
 OSD    Toggles the OSD while playing an item.
 ShowVideoMenu    Go to the DVD Video menu when playing a DVD.
 ShowSubtitles    Toggles whether subtitles are shown or not.
 NextSubtitle    Change to the next subtitle language, if there is more
than one.
 CodecInfo    Show codec information about the currently playing item
(during video or visualisation playback)
 NextPicture    Move to the next picture in a slideshow.
 PreviousPicture    Move to the previous picture in a slideshow.
 ZoomOut    Used in picture or slideshow to zoom out of the current
image.
 ZoomIn    Used in picture or slideshow to zoom in to the current image.
 Queue    Queue the item to the current playlist
 Playlist    Toggle to playlist view from My Music or My Videos
 ZoomNormal    Normal (fullscreen) viewing in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel1    Zoom to 120% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel2    Zoom to 150% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel3    Zoom to 200% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel4    Zoom to 280% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel5    Zoom to 400% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel6    Zoom to 600% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel7    Zoom to 900% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel8    Zoom to 1350% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel9    Zoom to 2000% in My Pictures
 NextCalibration    Used in Video + GUI calibration
 ResetCalibration    Used in Video + GUI calibration
 AnalogMove    Move in the calibration screens, and while zoomed in My
Pictures.
 Rotate    Rotate a picture in My Pictures
 Close    Used to close a dialog
 SubtitleDelayMinus    Decrease the delay amount of subtitles (use if
subtitles are displaying too late)
 SubtitleDelayPlus    Increase the delay amount of subtitles (use if
subtitles are displaying too early)
 AudioDelayMinus    Decrease the delay amount of audio (use if audio is
being heard too early)
 AudioDelayPlus    Increase the delay amount of audio (use if audio is
being heard too late)
 AudioNextLanguage    Change to the next audio track in a video with
multiple audio tracks.
 NextResolution    Used in Video calibration
 Number0    Used to input the number 0
 Number1    Used to input the number 1
 Number2    Used to input the number 2
 Number3    Used to input the number 3
 Number4    Used to input the number 4
 Number5    Used to input the number 5
 Number6    Used to input the number 6
 Number7    Used to input the number 7
 Number8    Used to input the number 8
 Number9    Used to input the number 9
 FastForward    Toggle the fastforward speed between normal play, 2x,
4x, 8x, 16x, and 32x.
 Rewind    Toggle the rewind speed between normal play, 2x, 4x, 8x, 16x,
and 32x.
 Play    Play the selected item (or folder of items), or unpause a
paused item.
 Delete    Used in My Files to delete a file.
 Copy    Used in My Files to copy a file.
 Move    Used in My Files to move a file.
 Rename    Used in My Files to rename a file.
 HideSubmenu    <depreciated>
 Screenshot    Take a screenshot of the current screen.
 PowerOff    Shutdown and power off
 VolumeUp    Increase the volume of playback.
 VolumeDown    Decrease the volume of playback.
 Mute    Mute the volume.
 BackSpace    Used in the virtual keyboards to delete one letter.
 ScrollUp    Variable speed scroll up for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 ScrollDown    Variable speed scroll down for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 AnalogFastForward    Variable speed fast forward for analog keys (stick
or triggers)
 AnalogRewind    Variable speed rewind for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 AnalogSeekForward    Variable speed seeking for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 AnalogSeekBack    Variable speed seeking for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 MoveItemUp    Used to rearrange playlists
 MoveItemDown    Used to rearrange playlists
 ContextMenu    Pops up a contextual menu
 Shift    Used in Virtual Keyboard to switch to upper or lower case
letters
 Symbols    Used in Virtual Keyboard to switch to or from symbols mode
 CursorLeft    Used in Virtual Keyboard to move the current cursor point
to the left
 CursorRight    Used in Virtual Keyboard to move the current cursor
point to the right
 ShowTime    Used to show the current play time in music + video
playback
 ShowPreset    Shows the current visualisation preset
(milkdrop/spectrum)
 PresetList    Pops up the visualisation preset list (milkdrop/spectrum)
 NextPreset    Next visualisation preset
 PreviousPreset    Previous visualisation preset
 LockPreset    Lock the current visualisation preset
 RandomPreset    Switch to a new random preset
 IncreaseRating    Unused
 DecreaseRating    Unused
 ToggleWatched    Toggles watched/unwatched status for Videos

***** basic remote setup

*Edit, Change and make sense of XBMC lirc/keymap : Zeltaks guide*
 1. the way it works is that you need to create or better copy from
*/usr/share/xmbc/system*
 the files remote.xml to */home/zeltak/.xbmc/usrdata/keymaps
*
 and
 lircmap.xml to */home/zeltak/.xbmc/usrdata/
*
 2.after installing lirc:
 -use irw from the CLI to get the remote irw names and codes
 Or look at
 */etc/lirc/lircd.conf*
 to see the key names
 example output:
 zeltak@ztpc:~$ irw
 00000000000017bb 00 Go Hauppauge\_350
 00000000000017bd 00 Power Hauppauge\_350
 000000000000179c 00 TV Hauppauge\_350
 3. edit the file Lircmap.xml :
 -make sure remote name fits the one you got in irw (Hauppauge\_350 in
this case) and that the name inside brackets fits the name in the irw
output ("TV" in this example<mytv>TV</mytv>)
 example:
 <lircmap>
    <remote device="Hauppauge\_350">
       <pause>Pause</pause>
       <stop>Stop</stop>
       <forward>Forward</forward>
       <reverse>Rewind</reverse>
       <left>Left</left>
       <right>Right</right>
       <up>Up</up>
       <down>Down</down>
       <select>OK</select>
       <pageplus>Ch+</pageplus>
       <pageminus>Ch-</pageminus>
       <back>Guide</back>
       <menu>Radio</menu>
       <title>Prev.Ch</title>
       <info>Menu/i</info>
       <skipplus>Skip</skipplus>
       <skipminus>Replay</skipminus>
       <display>Go</display>
       <start>Back/Exit</start>
       <record>Record</record>
       <volumeplus>Vol+</volumeplus>
       <volumeminus>Vol-</volumeminus>
       <mute>Mute</mute>
       <power>Power</power>
       <myvideo>Videos</myvideo>
       <mymusic>Music</mymusic>
       <mypictures>Pictures</mypictures>
       <mytv>TV</mytv>
       <one>1</one>
       <two>2</two>
       <three>3</three>
       <four>4</four>
       <five>5</five>
       <six>6</six>
       <seven>7</seven>
       <eight>8</eight>
       <nine>9</nine>
       <zero>0</zero>
       <star>Asterix</star>
       <hash>Blue</hash>
    </remote>
 3. edit the remote.xml (prev keymap.xml) file:
 Since XBMC DHARMA the location of the Keymap.xml file changed. It is
now named remote.xml and can be found in:
 *$HOME/.xbmc/userdata/keymaps/remote.xml*
 look for the remote section and edit the outside brackets to fit the
lircmap file (button names can be found at

[[http://wiki.xbmc.org/?title=Keymap.xml][http://wiki.xbmc.org/?title=Keymap.xml]]
 and here

[[http://forum.xbmc.org/showthread.php?t=45972][http://forum.xbmc.org/showthread.php?t=45972]]
 use only button names that are in the link under universal remote (IE
<star> etc...) , own names will not work!!
 b. modify the inside bracket to whatever xbmc command you want (see
[[http://wiki.xbmc.org/index.php?title=Window_IDs][http://wiki.xbmc.org/index.php?title=Window\_IDs]])
 example:
 <keymap>
   <global>
     <remote>
       <three>VolumeUp</three>
       <six>VolumeDown</six>
       <nine>Mute</nine>
       <play>Play</play>
       <pause>Pause</pause>
       <stop>Stop</stop>
       <forward>FastForward</forward>
       <reverse>Rewind</reverse>
       <left>Left</left>
       <right>Right</right>
       <up>Up</up>
       <down>Down</down>
       <select>Select</select>
       <pageplus>PageUp</pageplus>
       <pageminus>PageDown</pageminus>
       <back>ParentDir</back>
       <menu>PreviousMenu</menu>
       <title>ContextMenu</title>
       <info>Info</info>
       <skipplus>SkipNext</skipplus>
       <skipminus>SkipPrevious</skipminus>
       <display>FullScreen</display>
       <start>PreviousMenu</start>
       <record>Screenshot</record>
       <volumeplus>VolumeUp</volumeplus>
       <volumeminus>VolumeDown</volumeminus>
       <mute>Mute</mute>
       <power>XBMC.ShutDown()</power>
       <myvideo>XBMC.ActivateWindow(MyVideos)</myvideo>
       <mymusic>XBMC.ActivateWindow(MyMusic)</mymusic>
       <mypictures>XBMC.ActivateWindow(MyPictures)</mypictures>
       <mytv>XBMC.ActivateWindow(Home)</mytv>
       <star>XBMC.ActivateWindow(favourites)</star>
       <hash>ActivateWindow(PlayerControls)</hash>
     </remote>

***** set sms like remote pad

*
 set sms like remote pad*
 If you're using a remote, you'll want to use "SMS" style jumping, where
the "2" key is letters "A, B, and C", "3" is "D, E, and F", etc.
 So, press "2" once and jump to "A", press twice, jump to "B", etc.
 Place the following in keymap.xml
 Code:
 <number2>JumpSMS2</number2>
 <number3>JumpSMS3</number3>
 <number4>JumpSMS4</number4>
 <number5>JumpSMS5</number5>
 <number6>JumpSMS6</number6>
 <number7>JumpSMS7</number7>
 <number8>JumpSMS8</number8>
 <number9>JumpSMS9</number9>

***** Jump points

 *Jump points
*
 to jump to a video library section (tv for example)
 ActivateWindow(MyVideos,TV Shows)
 to jump to a directory in your shares (recordings for example), find
the shares name in /userdata/sources.xml and issue the command
ActivateWindow(videofiles,dir), for example
 <start>ActivateWindow(videofiles,1.Recordings)</start>
 List of most XBMC jump points
 You can [Activate a Window] or run a [Built In Function], or specify
one of the [Actions].
 Below are valid secondary parameters for the applicable Window IDs
 Example:
     * You want a button in your skin or on your remote taking you
directly to the movie listing you let that button do
  xbmc.activatewindow(videolibrary,movietitles)
 videolibrary:
 videolibrary,videodb://1/ (video library root)
 movies
 moviegenres
 movietitles
 movieyears
 movieactors
 moviedirectors
 recentlyaddedmovies
 tvshows
 tvshowgenres
 tvshowtitles
 tvshowyears
 tvshowactors
 recentlyaddedepisodes
 musicvideotitles
 usicvideos
 musicvideogenres
 musicvideodirectors
 musicvideostudios
 musicvideoartists
 recentlyaddedmusicvideos
 special://videoplaylists/
 plugin://video/
 musiclibrary:
 musiclibrary,musicdb://1/ (music library root)
 genres
 artists
 albums
 songs
 top100
 top100songs
 top100albums
 recentlyaddedalbums
 recentlyplayedalbums
 compilations
 playlists
 years
 special://musicplaylists/
 plugin://music/*XBMC Actions
*
 Action     Description
 Left    Move left off a control.
 Right    Move right off a control.
 Up    Move up off a control.
 Down    Move down off a control.
 Select    Select a button, or an item from a list of thumb view.
 PageUp    Scroll up on page in a list, thumb, or text view.
 PageDown    Scroll down on page in a list, thumb, or text view.
 Highlight    Highlight an item in a list or thumb view.
 ParentDir    Go up a folder to the parent folder.
 PreviousMenu    Go back to the previous menu screen.
 Info    Show the information about the currently highlighted item, or
currently playing item.
 Pause    Pause the currently playing item.
 Stop    Stop the currently playing item.
 SkipNext    Skip to the next item in a playlist.
 SkipPrevious    Skip to the previous item in a playlist.
 FullScreen    Toggles fullscreen modes (either visualisation or video
playback)
 AspectRatio    Toggle through the various aspect ratio modes (Normal is
the preferred option).
 StepForward    Step forward 1% in the movie.
 StepBack    Step back 1% in the movie.
 BigStepForward    Step forward 10% in the movie.
 BigStepBack    Step back 10% in the movie.
 SmallStepBack    Step back 7 seconds in the current video.
 OSD    Toggles the OSD while playing an item.
 ShowVideoMenu    Go to the DVD Video menu when playing a DVD.
 ShowSubtitles    Toggles whether subtitles are shown or not.
 NextSubtitle    Change to the next subtitle language, if there is more
than one.
 CodecInfo    Show codec information about the currently playing item
(during video or visualisation playback)
 NextPicture    Move to the next picture in a slideshow.
 PreviousPicture    Move to the previous picture in a slideshow.
 ZoomOut    Used in picture or slideshow to zoom out of the current
image.
 ZoomIn    Used in picture or slideshow to zoom in to the current image.
 Queue    Queue the item to the current playlist
 Playlist    Toggle to playlist view from My Music or My Videos
 ZoomNormal    Normal (fullscreen) viewing in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel1    Zoom to 120% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel2    Zoom to 150% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel3    Zoom to 200% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel4    Zoom to 280% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel5    Zoom to 400% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel6    Zoom to 600% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel7    Zoom to 900% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel8    Zoom to 1350% in My Pictures
 ZoomLevel9    Zoom to 2000% in My Pictures
 NextCalibration    Used in Video + GUI calibration
 ResetCalibration    Used in Video + GUI calibration
 AnalogMove    Move in the calibration screens, and while zoomed in My
Pictures.
 Rotate    Rotate a picture in My Pictures
 Close    Used to close a dialog
 SubtitleDelayMinus    Decrease the delay amount of subtitles (use if
subtitles are displaying too late)
 SubtitleDelayPlus    Increase the delay amount of subtitles (use if
subtitles are displaying too early)
 AudioDelayMinus    Decrease the delay amount of audio (use if audio is
being heard too early)
 AudioDelayPlus    Increase the delay amount of audio (use if audio is
being heard too late)
 AudioNextLanguage    Change to the next audio track in a video with
multiple audio tracks.
 NextResolution    Used in Video calibration
 Number0    Used to input the number 0
 Number1    Used to input the number 1
 Number2    Used to input the number 2
 Number3    Used to input the number 3
 Number4    Used to input the number 4
 Number5    Used to input the number 5
 Number6    Used to input the number 6
 Number7    Used to input the number 7
 Number8    Used to input the number 8
 Number9    Used to input the number 9
 FastForward    Toggle the fastforward speed between normal play, 2x,
4x, 8x, 16x, and 32x.
 Rewind    Toggle the rewind speed between normal play, 2x, 4x, 8x, 16x,
and 32x.
 Play    Play the selected item (or folder of items), or unpause a
paused item.
 Delete    Used in My Files to delete a file.
 Copy    Used in My Files to copy a file.
 Move    Used in My Files to move a file.
 Rename    Used in My Files to rename a file.
 HideSubmenu    <depreciated>
 Screenshot    Take a screenshot of the current screen.
 PowerOff    Shutdown and power off
 VolumeUp    Increase the volume of playback.
 VolumeDown    Decrease the volume of playback.
 Mute    Mute the volume.
 BackSpace    Used in the virtual keyboards to delete one letter.
 ScrollUp    Variable speed scroll up for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 ScrollDown    Variable speed scroll down for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 AnalogFastForward    Variable speed fast forward for analog keys (stick
or triggers)
 AnalogRewind    Variable speed rewind for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 AnalogSeekForward    Variable speed seeking for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 AnalogSeekBack    Variable speed seeking for analog keys (stick or
triggers)
 MoveItemUp    Used to rearrange playlists
 MoveItemDown    Used to rearrange playlists
 ContextMenu    Pops up a contextual menu
 Shift    Used in Virtual Keyboard to switch to upper or lower case
letters
 Symbols    Used in Virtual Keyboard to switch to or from symbols mode
 CursorLeft    Used in Virtual Keyboard to move the current cursor point
to the left
 CursorRight    Used in Virtual Keyboard to move the current cursor
point to the right
 ShowTime    Used to show the current play time in music + video
playback
 ShowPreset    Shows the current visualisation preset
(milkdrop/spectrum)
 PresetList    Pops up the visualisation preset list (milkdrop/spectrum)
 NextPreset    Next visualisation preset
 PreviousPreset    Previous visualisation preset
 LockPreset    Lock the current visualisation preset

**** svn tips

**** scripts

*start xbmc from script
*
 use the backup script or create new script with this inside
 #!/bin/bash
 PROCESS=`ps -ef | grep xbmc.bin | grep -v grep`
 if [ "$PROCESS" = "" ]
 then
         rm -f /home/xbmc/core*
         DISPLAY=:0 /usr/bin/xbmc &
 else
         killall -v -s9 xbmc.bin
 fi
 later add this script to irexec to a button in lirc, example:
 begin
 remote = Hauppauge\_350
 prog = irexec
 button = Blue
 repeat = 4
 config = /home/zeltak/Scripts/xbmc.sh
 end*make sure Irexec is UP and runing
*
 create a script in /usr/bin/ and paste this
 #!/bin/sh
 while true; do
    irexec
    sleep 5
 done
 Make sure the script is executable and owned by zeltak with
permissions.
 Add it to the autostart folder and in addition nake sure irxevent and
irexec also autostart at bootup

**** mythtv integration

*Add MythTV as a Video Source*
    0.add ip adress of mythserver (ztpc) to host list and then add
hostname instead of ip
    1. Once XBMC is installed and running on your Xbox go to "Videos"
and select "Add Source"
    2. In the "Enter the paths or browse for the media locations." field
you will need to enter the properly formatted username, password, and IP
information for your mythconverg database. This information should be
prefixed with "myth://" and follow standard linux network access
formatting of: "username:password@ipaddress". For example, if your
mythconverg database is located on a machine whose ip address is
192.168.1.116 and uses the username "mythtv" and the password "password"
you should enter the following:
 myth://mythtv:<pwd>@localhost (myth://mythtv:<pwd>@<ip>)
 user (mythtv) = mysql username from mysql.txt
 pass = pass from mysql.txt.
 Examples
       myth://mythtv:password@192.168.1.116
 or
  myth://mythtv:password@ztpc
    3. Input a name for this source in the "Enter a name for this Media
Source" field. This name is what will appear in the "Videos" list of
XBMC.
    4. Click on "OK" to add this source to the "Videos" list.

**** hebrew issues

*get hebrew working in XBMC
*
 Make sure that arial is set as a font in appearnace!

**** nfos

*How to create custom nfo's
*
 name movie files S01E01-filename1, S01E02-filename2, etc. and put them
into a folder.
 Then run Yang to generate the movie nfo files (nfo files with the same
exact name of the movie file).
 After Yang creates the nfo files edit them with Notepad
 then create the tvshow.nfo file in a text editor and drop it into the
folder of the above movies.*tv show example-XBMC wiki
*
 he filename of the NFO should be "tvshow.nfo" (Exact, NOT the name of
the actual TV show) and it should be in the root folder of the TV show.
 The nfo xml file may contain a valid <episodeguideurl> to allow online
updates. If not, only episodes with nfo files will be added.
 <tvshow>
         <title>My TV Show</title>

        <episodeguideurl>http://www.thetvdb.com/api/1D62F2F90030C444/series/seriesid/all/language.zip<episodeguideurl>
         <!-- select the correct seriesid and language (en.zip) -->
         <rating>9.900</rating>
         <episode>0</episode>
         <plot>The best TV show in the world</plot>
         <genre>Action and Adventure / Drama</genre>
         <premiered>2000-01-01</premiered>
         <studio></studio>
         <actor>
             <name>Big John</name>
             <role>Jack of all trades</role>
             <thumb></thumb>
         </actor>
     </tvshow>
 TV Episodes
 The *.nfo must be named exactly as the episode filename (i.e.
episodename.avi and episodename.nfo) and in the same folder, allowing
multiple episode and *.nfo files within the same folder.
  <episodedetails>
         <title>My TV Episode</title>
         <rating>10.00</rating>
         <season>2</season>
         <episode>1</episode>
         <plot>he best episode in the world</plot>
         <credits>Writer</credits>
         <director>Mr. Vision</director>
         <aired>2000-01-01</aired>
         <actor>
             <name>Little Suzie</name>
             <role>Pole Jumper/Dancer</role>
         </actor>
  </episodedetails>
 Movie example-XBMC wiki
 Movie.nfo will override all and any nfo files in the same folder as the
media files. If there is only one nfo file in a folder, The scraper will
use it for all media files in that folder. If there are multiple media
files in a folder, the *.nfo must be named exactly the same as the video
file it is representing (ie. moviename.avi and moviename.nfo). In the
case of multi-part (stacked) video stacking, name the file either
moviename.nfo or moviename-CD1.nfo where the first filename is
moviename-CD1.avi.
 <movie>
         <title>Who knows</title>
         <originaltitle>Who knows for real</originaltitle>
         <rating>6.100000</rating>
         <year>2008</year>
         <top250>0</top250>
         <votes>50</votes>
         <outline>A look at the role of the Buckeye State in the 2004
Presidential Election.</outline>
         <plot>A look at the role of the Buckeye State in the 2004
Presidential Election.</plot>
         <tagline></tagline>
         <runtime>90 min</runtime>

        <thumb>http://ia.ec.imdb.com/media/imdb/01/I/25/65/31/10f.jpg</thumb>
         <mpaa>Not available</mpaa>
         <playcount>0</playcount>
         <watched>false</watched>
         <id>tt0432337</id>
         <filenameandpath>c:\Dummy\_Movie\_Files\Movies\...So Goes The
Nation.avi</filenameandpath>
         <trailer></trailer>
         <genre></genre>
         <credits></credits>
         <director>Adam Del Deo</director>
         <actor>
             <name>Paul Begala</name>
             <role>Himself</role>
         </actor>
         <actor>
             <name>George W. Bush</name>
             <role>Himself</role>
         </actor>
         <actor>
             <name>Mary Beth Cahill</name>
             <role>Herself</role>
         </actor>
         <actor>
             <name>Ed Gillespie</name>
             <role>Himself</role>
         </actor>
         <actor>
             <name>John Kerry</name>
             <role>Himself</role>
         </actor>
     </movie>*TV Show- Zeltak Example
*
 name the file tvshow.nfo and paste below in file
 add to the root of the TV show
 Show
     <tvshow>
         <title>TV Dinners</title>
         <rating>5</rating>
         <episode>0</episode>
         <plot>TV dinners with Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall</plot>
         <genre>Food</genre>
         <premiered>2000-01-01</premiered>
         <studio></studio>
     </tvshow>
 For each episode either generate with YANG ot paste below for each
episode
 Episode
 <movie>
 <title>S01E01 - Flowers&Vietnamese</title>
 <genre>Food</genre>
 <movie>
 *How To Manually add a folder/series Tips
*
 create a folder named as a TV show or anything else, for example to
bunch all shows about sports create a folder called sports
 add files and name them as you want to appear in XBMC library
 Run YANG and create nfo for each espisode
 create a tvshow.nfo (see above examples)
 add numbering to the shows and change the episode nfo's accordingly to
match the avi files
 This can be all done with krename using this mask:
 S01E0#-$

**** offline/deleted media

***** create 'stub' files to represent offline/deleted media

media stub files represent media outside of the online digital
infrastructure and allow XBMC's library to catalogue your "offline"
media collection, as well as ask for the media when selected for
playback.
 By default these files have a .disc extension (modifiable via
advancedsettings.xml).
 In cooperation with Confluence Skin's (and possibly others) feature to
search for words like DVD, Bluray, and HDDVD in the filename it is
possible to create a disc stub file that will show correct media flags
in the skin.
 For example, if you have Finding Nemo on DVD, you could create an empty
file called:
 "Finding Nemo (2003).dvd.disc"
 and add it to your library. In the XBMC libray this file will show up
with the DVD media flag in the Confluence Skin and when selected you
will be prompted to insert the Finding Nemo DVD.
 To mark a disc stub as BluRay add the words "bluray" or "bdrip" to the
file name (as explained above). For HDDVD add "hddvd". For DVD add
"dvd". For TV add "pdtv", "hdtv", or "dsr". For VHS add "vhs".
 XBMC now has support for adding a custom message to be displayed when
attempting to play a Disc Stub file. This is accomplished by treating
the disc stub file as an xml file with the following layout:
 <discstub>
   <message>Message to be displayed</message>
 </discstub>
 The message will be displayed on the second line of the dialog box that
asks you to insert a disc when selecting a disc stub file for playback.
This added feature allows users who use a numbered library for their
disc media to also take advantage of this new Disc Stub file support in
XBMC.
 example of a file stub name:
 transformers.dvd.disc

*** mythtv

**** connect with frontend

*To fix problems with frontends problem connecting to database*
 sudo dpkg-reconfigure mythtv-database
 sudo dpkg-reconfigure mythtv-common*make sure that these are checked
when having issues connecting*
     * Local Backend IP address set to 192.168.2.55 in MythTV Backend
Setup
     * Master Backend IP address changed to 192.168.2.55 in MythTV
Backend Setup
     * Commented out the "bind-address" line in
/etc/mysql/conf.d/mythtv.cnf
     * Commented out the "bind-address" line in /etc/mysql/my.cnf
     *Setup Pin number correctly (use 0000 for all acesss)*to see if you
have remote acess to mythtv mysql database isse this command*
  mysql -u mythtv -p -h 192.168.0.7
 where -u XXXX is for user (mythtv in most cases), -h XXXXXX is the IP
adress of the mythtv box

**** audio issues

*Default way to get spdiff*
 in the mythtv settings>General>
 1)use ALSA:default as the Audio output device and
  2)set mixer to default in the General settings section of the frontend
settings.

**** cli tips

*Check Version of Mythv installed*
  mythbackend --version

**** epg

*To get epg command using Wine*
  wine /home/mythtv/.wine/drive\_c/Program\ Files/MegaEPG/megaepg.exe
*To fill mythdatabase with the EPG data*
  mythfilldatabase --file 1 /home/mythtv/.wine/drive\_c/Program\
Files/MegaEPG/xml/epgdata.xml
 *MegaEPG Setup
*
 Transfer MegaEPG
  in a windows machine install MegaEPG and transfer the folder (usually
in C:\program files\MegaEPG) to the Linux machine (through
USB,Network,CD etc..)
  in: /home/mythtv/.wine/drive\_c/Program Files (this Dir is created
when you install Wine)
 Configure
 in the terminal (see above) type or paste:
 wine /home/mythtv/.wine/drive\_c/Program\ Files/MegaEPG/epgconfig.exe
 then a GUI setup comes up.
  
   follow the instructions according to your setup (HOT,Yes etc..) and
choose your channels and other options:
  
  important tips :
  
   choose xmltv compatible
    i recommend to use 3 days only and not more due to time issues
  **make sure that in the grabber order ynet is first (i found out that
worked best)
  when finished in the terminal again paste:
 wine /home/mythtv/.wine/drive\_c/Program\ Files/MegaEPG/megaepg.exe
  if all goes well it should take a while to download the EPG (depending
on how many days you've selected and your bandwidth) and the create an
epg file in:
  
  /home/mythtv/.wine/drive\_c/Program\ Files/MegaEPG/xml/epgdata.xml
  
 after this finishes successfully type in the terminal the below line,
This should fill the EPG data inside mythtv's Database:
 mythfilldatabase --file 1 /home/mythtv/.wine/drive\_c/Program\
Files/MegaEPG/xml/epgdata.xml
 Mythtv setup
  in the terminal (see above) type or paste:
 mythtv-setup
 you'll be back in the mythtv setup screen (see part 2).
  
  now choose input connections again, choose your input source (tuner in
my case)
  
  then press "fetch channels from listings source"
  
  this will create the channels in mythtv according to the channels you
choose in your EPG Setup
  
  Press finish and ESC to get to the main menu
  
  press channel editor and then edit your selected channels, its pretty
easy (Untitled 148)!
  
  press ESC and ESC again to exit MythSetup!

**** mythweb

*MythWeb setup*
 1)get CLI myth commands and General Tips working:
    a)add /CLI myth commands and General Tips to the end of your IP!
    eg.: 192.168.0.7/CLI myth commands and General Tips
    
 b)if you get:
 Database Access Denied
 You are most likely receiving this message because you
 have failed to configure CLI myth commands and General Tips's database
login info.
 Please see .htaccess for instructions.
  
 then:
  
 make sure the password in /etc/mythtv/mythweb-htaccess is the same like
in /etc/mythtv/mysql.txt
  
  
 /etc/mythtv/mythweb-htaccess:
  
  setenv db\_server "localhost"
  setenv db\_name "mythconverg"
  setenv db\_login "mythtv"
  setenv db\_password "XXXXXX" Needs to be the same as:
  
 /etc/mythtv/mysql.txt
  
  
  DBHostName=localhost
  DBUserName=mythtv
  DBName=mythconverg
  DBPassword=XXXXXX
  
 Should work now!*Access MythWeb Securely With SSH and PuTTY
*
 How To Access Your MythWeb Page More Securely with SSH
 The original document is located here
 Now that you have RemoteAccessfromWindows with Public-Key Encryption
enabled on your SSH connection to your MythTV box, wouldn't it be nice
to access MythWeb remotely without exposing port 80 of your MythTV box
to the world? I thought so too. Here's how I did it.
 Building a SSH Tunnel . . . It's cheaper than Boston's "Big Dig" and
easier than you think!
 Again, you'll need PuTTY to do this.
 Crank up PuTTY on your Windows box and load your SSH settings, but
don't press open...yet.
 Under SSH in the tree on the left, select Tunnels.
 Under Add New Forwarded Port enter:
 Source port: 80
 Destination: Internal-LAN-IP-Address-of-MythTV-Box:80
 For example:
 Source port: 80
  Destination: 192.168.105.7:80
 Where 192.168.105.7 is the "internal LAN" IP address of my MythTV box
on my home network. BTW, it helps if you've configured a static IP
address for your MythTV box. You'll always know where it is. Ensure
Local and Auto radio buttons are selected under destination. Press Add
 (As a post-script to this step... If you enter the IP Address (or the
host name of your DNS service) to your internet connection at home (Your
WAN - the IP address your ISP assigned to your connection at home)
instead of your internal LAN IP address of your MythTV box, you'll get
to the setup page of your router. It can come in handy if you ever need
to remotely configure your router.)
 In the SSH tree on the left, select Session. In the saved session box,
give it a new name. (i.e. SSH-HTTP tunnel) and press Save.
 Press Open. Your SSH terminal window will open. Enter your mythtv
username and the passphrase. (You didn't leave the passphrase blank when
you set up the Public-Key Encryption, did you?) Minimize the terminal
window.
 Fire up Firefox (or another web browser of your choice). In the address
bar, type:
 http://localhost/mythweb/
 You should be presented with your MythWeb page! To kill the tunnel,
pull up the terminal you minimized and type exit.
 You can use a tunnel to do lots-o-things, this is just one example that
I thought would be practical to many MythTV users. In the original
document I referenced at the beginning of this How To, one person said
they were able to remotely stream live TV thru the tunnel. Very cool.

**** telnet

*Telnet socket
*Release 0.19 of MythTV introduced the ability to control mythfrontend
via a socket interface. Commands are sent and replies are received in
text mode, there is no fancy xml interface or anything - it is meant to
be able to be used via something as simple as telnet. This feature has
to be enabled in the general settings of the frontend setup. The default
port is 6546, so after restarting mythfrontend, you can test by
telnetting to localhost on port 6546
 telnet localhost 6546
 There can be only one socket connection to mythfrontend at a time, if a
new connection is opened, the old one will be automatically closed.
 See also MythTV docs on Telnet socket
 Supported Commands
 For a list of supported commands, type "help". For help on a specific
command, type "help COMMAND" (where COMMAND is the name of the command
like "help jump").
 jump
 Usage: jump JUMPPOINT
 Where JUMPPOINT is one of the following:
 channelpriorities - Channel Recording Priorities
 channelrecpriority - Channel Recording Priorities
 deletebox - TV Recording Deletion
 deleterecordings - TV Recording Deletion
 flixbrowse - Netflix Browser
 flixhistory - Netflix History
 flixqueue - Netflix Queue
 guidegrid - Program Guide
 livetv - Live TV
 livetvinguide - Live TV In Guide
 mainmenu - Main Menu
 managerecordings - Manage Recordings / Fix Conflicts
 manualbox - Manual Record Scheduling
 manualrecording - Manual Record Scheduling
 musicplaylists - Select music playlists
 mythgallery - MythGallery
 mythgame - MythGame
 mythmovietime - MythMovieTime
 mythnews - MythNews
 mythvideo - MythVideo
 mythweather - MythWeather
 playbackbox - TV Recording Playback
 playbackrecordings - TV Recording Playback
 playdvd - Play DVD
 playmusic - Play music
 previousbox - Previously Recorded
 progfinder - Program Finder
 programfinder - Program Finder
 programguide - Program Guide
 programrecpriority - Program Recording Priorities
 recordingpriorities - Program Recording Priorities
 ripcd - Rip CD
 ripdvd - Rip DVD
 statusbox - Status Screen
 videobrowser - Video Browser
 videogallery - Video Gallery
 videolistings - Video Listings
 videomanager - Video Manager
 viewscheduled - Manage Recordings / Fix Conflicts
 key
 key LETTER - Send the letter key specified
 key NUMBER - Send the number key specified
 key CODE - Send one of the following key codes
 Supported keys:
 #, $, %, &, (, ), *, +, ,, -, ., /, :, ;, <, =, >, ?, [, \, ],
ampersand, asterisk, backslash, backspace,
 backtab, bar, bracketleft, bracketright, colon, comma, delete, dollar,
down, end, enter, equal, escape,
 f1, f10, f11, f12, f13, f14, f15, f16, f17, f18, f19, f2, f20, f21,
f22, f23, f24, f3, f4, f5, f6, f7, f8, f9,
 greater, home, insert, left, less, minus, numbersign, pagedown, pageup,
parenleft, parenright, percent,
 period, pipe, plus, poundsign, question, return, right, semicolon,
slash, space, tab, up, |
 play
 play channel up - Change channel Up
 play channel down - Change channel Down
 play channel NUMBER - Change to a specific channel number
 play chanid NUMBER - Change to a specific channel id (chanid)
 play file FILENAME - Play specified file
 play program CHANID yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm:ss
                       - Play program with chanid & starttime
 play program CHANID yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm:ss resume
                       - Resume program with chanid & starttime
 play save screenshot FILENAME
                       - Save screenshot from current position
 play seek beginning - Seek to the beginning of the recording
 play seek forward - Skip forward in the video
 play seek backward - Skip backwards in the video
 play seek HH:MM:SS - Seek to a specific position
 play speed pause - Pause playback
 play speed normal - Playback at normal speed
 play speed 1x - Playback at normal speed
 play speed -1x - Playback at normal speed in reverse
 play speed 1/16x - Playback at 1/16x speed
 play speed 1/8x - Playback at 1/8x speed
 play speed 1/4x - Playback at 1/4x speed
 play speed 1/2x - Playback at 1/2x speed
 play speed 2x - Playback at 2x speed
 play speed 4x - Playback at 4x speed
 play speed 8x - Playback at 8x speed
 play speed 16x - Playback at 16x speed
 play stop - Stop playback
 query
 query location - Query current screen or location (i.e. MainMenu)
 query recordings - List currently available recordings
 query recording CHANID STARTTIME
                       - List info about the specified program
 query liveTV - List current TV schedule
 query liveTV CHANID - Query current program for specified channel
 query time - Query current time on server
 exit
 Terminates the session.

*** mythbuntu

**** disable mythfrontend starting

1)as root go into /usr/share/mythtv and change the mythfrontend.sh
script to .BAL
 2)to operate mythtv when needed run /usr/bin/mythfrontend.real

*** other htpc

**** epg

***** freq table hot cables

*Mhz Freq for Hot cables
*
 Arotz1    504062
 Arotz2    368062
 Arotz 10    495500 (496062)
 sport5    255500
 ESPN    440062
 artoz8    279500
 BBC Prime 327500
 National Geographic    336000
 Hallmark    480062
 hot3    231500
 Vh1-   183500
 Eurosport    648062
 kids6 264000
 CNN 288000
 METV 303500
 edu23 375500
 music24 384000
 Hop 224062
 MTV 272062
 Sky news 296062
 Starworld 344062
 arotz33 512062
 AXN 391500
 Hot4 (Movies) 247500
 star turkey 192000
 Russia1 312000
 Fashion TV 351500
 shopping 360000
 russia2 399500
 LBC 423500
 local9 432062
 TV5 519500
 TV2 528062
 Viva 543500
 Arab2 663500
 RTL 200062
 3SAT 582500
 Duna 654500

**** hardware issues

*Disable X screen saver*
  xset s off
  xset dpms force off
 *Only digital audio would output and NOT analog (still out of spdif).
*
  0) Stop XBMC
 1) Create a file in your home directory called .asoundrc that contains
the following single
 line: pcm.!default spdif
 2) Run: speaker-test -c 2
 3) If you hear sound, you can stop.
 4) Remove .asoundrc
 5) Restart XBMC*fix dual wintv pvr-150 bootup remote not responding
*
  if the remote stops reacting suddenly try editing
  /etc/lirc/hardware.conf
  and changing /dev/lirc0 to /dev/lirc1 and vice versa)
  reboot the computer and see if it helps
  Note: you might need to change 0 to 1 and then 1 to 0 and reboot a few
times until it works Disabling screen blanking
  Open up /etc/X11/xorg.conf and comment out option dpms
 *Blue line(s) surrounding Video (Old Nvidia Driver Problem)
*
  One common symptom is the following: the NVidia driver may (or may
not) give one or more blue lines surrounding the display during TV or
DVD playback. This is something which is mostly seen on widescreen TV
displays. The 'xvattr' command can be used to solve the problem:
 xvattr -a XV\_COLORKEY -v 66048
 Add the command somewhere in the Xorg startup sequence. For my Debian
GNU/Linux 4.0 system I wrote the file:
 /etc/X11/Xsession.d/98custom\_disable-blueline
 with the following contents:
  
 #!/bin/sh
 xvattr -a XV\_COLORKEY -v 66048

** internet-web
*** Google
**** gmail 
***** search 
****** attachents over x size
Searching by size is very simple. You just type size: and then the minimum number of you want each message to be. For example, you'd type size:1000000 for messages greater than 1MB. 

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
size:25000000 
#+END_EXAMPLE
or use these links

for attachment over 25mb: 
https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/#search/size%3A25000000

for attachment over 5mb:
https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/#search/size%3A5000000 

****** filter out and delete crap 
from social sites
#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
from:(@facebookmail.com| @linkedin.com | @facebookmail.com | @plus.google.com | @twitter.com | @researchgate.net ) 
#+END_EXAMPLE

impersonal crap


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
"hello sir" | "hello webmaster" | "hello admin" | "dear sir" | "dear webmaster" | "dear admin"
#+END_EXAMPLE


academia crap 


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
israeligeoassoc@  | 
#+END_EXAMPLE



general crap 

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
"to view this email as a web page, go here" |"having trouble reading this email" | "having trouble viewing this email" | "email not displaying correctly" | "unsubscribe | change subscriber options" | "unsubscribe from this list" | "unsubscribe instantly"| "please unsubscribe" | "update subscription preferences" | "email preferences" | "follow the URL below to update your preferences or opt-out" | "if you would rather not receive future communications from" | "if you would like to unsubscribe"| "to ensure that you continue receiving our emails, please add us to your address book or safe list."| "safe unsubscribe" |"to unsubscribe" | "unsubscribe from these emails" | "unsubscribe from our emails" | "unsubscribe |  please click" |  "unsubscribe from future" |  "you can unsubscribe here" |  "to unsubscribe or change subscriber options" |  "this |  message was sent to leilaniana@gmail.com" (replace with your email address) |  "this email has been sent to you by" | "to opt out" | "opt out using TrueRemove" | "one-click unsubscribe" | "do not reply to this email" 


#part 2
"view this email in a browser"| "please do not reply to this message." | "if you no longer wish to receive our emails" | "if you do not wish to receive email from"|
"no longer receive this newsletter"| "do not want to receive any newsletters"| "to remove this e-mail address from" | "removed from this mailing list" | "manage your email settings" | "edit your subscription" | "you may unsubscribe" | "you can unsubscribe" | 
"powered by YMLP" | "update your contact information" | "update your contact details" | "change your subscription settings" | "manage your subscription"| "manage your subscriptions"|  "update Email Address or Unsubscribe"| "this email was sent by" | "this email was intended for" | "you received this email because"| "you received this e-mail because" | "you are receiving this message" | "prefer not to receive invites from"

#+END_EXAMPLE

***** unmute an email

 to see all the convo's you've got muted, type is:muted into the Gmail
 search box. Select the conversation you want to unmute (demute?), and
 from the drop-down choose "Move to inbox." That will restore new message
 notifications on that thread from there on out.

***** Sort GMail Messages by Size of Attachments

 ﻿*Sort GMail Messages by Size of Attachments*

 The idea is that your Google Docs will connect to your Gmail account and
 compute the size of every message that's present in your mailbox. If it
 finds a bulky message (size > 1 MB), it will make a note of it in the
 spreadsheet.Once the sheet has a list of all the bulky message, you can
 sort the sheet by the Size column to find the big ones. Or use the
 Filter option (the Funnel icon) to find messages that are within a
 particular range (5 MB < size < 10 MB). Click the "View" link to open
 the corresponding message in Gmail, forward it to a secondary email
 address and delete it from the primary Inbox to recover space.That's all
 the theory you should know, let's now put this program into action:

 Create a copy of
 [[https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0Aofk8L6brI_edDJMeXBoRTNTdzA4RVE4MzUtTlV0cmc&newcopy=true][this
 sheet]] in your Google Docs account.

 A new Gmail Menu will appear in the sheet after about a minute. Select
 "Reset Canvas" from the Gmail menu to initialize your sheet.

 Accept the
 [[http://img.labnol.org/files/authorization_required.png][authorization]]
 screen and then choose
 [[http://img.labnol.org/files/grant_access.png][Grant Access]] to let
 Google Docs access your Gmail Inbox. This is completely safe because
 your own Google Docs account is requesting access to your own Gmail
 account (see [[http://ctrlq.org/code/19040-gmail-size-search][source
 code]]).

 Once the permissions have been granted, choose "Scan Mailbox" from the
 Gmail menu to start the scanning process.

 Sit back and relax as the last step may take time depending on how big
 your Gmail mailbox is. Also, if the program is stuck or if you
 accidentally close the browser tab, open the same Google sheet, choose
 "Scan Mailbox" again and the script will resume scanning from where it
 left off.

  *Scan Gmail Messages with a trigger*

 If your Gmail mailbox is large, you can also set up a time-driven
 trigger to let the script automatically without manual intervention. In
 this case, you can even close the browser tab and the script will run in
 the background. Here's how:

 While the Google sheet is open, go to Tools -> Script Editor. On the
 next screen, choose Resources -> Current Script Triggers.

 Click "Add a New Trigger," change the Event from "Spreadsheet" to "Time
 Driven" and set a minutes timer that triggers every 10 minutes.

 Save the trigger, authorize the script if it requires and close the
 sheet.
  Pasted from
 <[[http://www.labnol.org/internet/sort-gmail-by-size/21191/][http://www.labnol.org/internet/sort-gmail-by-size/21191/]]>

***** configure mail clients with gmail

 *Configuring mail clients with Gmail
 *
  You can use the following information to configure IMAP with many mail
 clients. If you encounter difficulties, we suggest contacting your mail
 client's customer support department for further instructions -- we're
 unable to provide assistance with configuring mail clients not listed
 here.
  Incoming Mail (IMAP) Server - requires SSL: imap.gmail.com
  Use SSL: Yes
  Port: 993
  Outgoing Mail (SMTP) Server - requires TLS: smtp.gmail.com (use
 authentication)
  Use Authentication: Yes
  Use STARTTLS: Yes (some clients call this SSL)
  Port: 465 or 587
  Account Name: your full email address (including @gmail.com) Google
 Apps users, please enter username@your\_domain.com
  Email Address: your full Gmail email address (username@gmail.com)
 Google Apps users, please enter username@your\_domain.com
  Password: your Gmail password
  Please note that if your client does not support SMTP authentication,
 you won't be able to send mail through your client using your Gmail
 address.
  Also, if you're having trouble sending mail but you've confirmed that
 encyrption is active for SMTP in your mail client, try to configure your
 SMTP server on a different port: 465 or 587.

 [[http://mail.google.com/support/bin/answer.py?answer=78799Search][http://mail.google.com/support/bin/answer.py?answer=78799*Search
 operators in Gmail
 *
 ]]

***** google search cheatsheet

 [[tech_files/img/Image.png]]

***** search only unread mails in gmail

 use:
  is:unread label:inbox

***** google plus
****** leave a community
 use the phone g+ app and go to the specific community, then in the menu press 'leave' community 
*** isp

*Info (dns servers. ip stuff etc...) for Israeli ISP
*
 see attached file

**** Israel ISP settings

[[tech_files/attach/isp.pdf][Attachment #04 (isp.pdf)]]
*** github
**** search tips 
***** search by  extension
extension:[ext]
Example: a star extension:rb extension:py
*** torrents
**** use proxies
With torrents, all you've got to do is go to any number of lists of
public proxies and paste any one of those addresses into the Proxy field
of your BitTorrent client.
 To head your ISP off at the pass, go to your BitTorrent app's
preferences and enable encryption. That'll make it harder to pin you
down. The downside is that it also precludes you from connecting to
other BT users who aren't using encryption. Many don't, but it's sort of
like a (tiny bit extraneous) pirating condom. Better safe than sorry.

** computer hardware
*** tp link

**** open ports

Correct place for port forwarding (open ports to the outside)
 Forwarding-virtual servers
 [[tech_files/img/Image_fM1HUqg09LTxe6Fh535i5A_0001.png]]

*** wind

**** ubuntu 8.10 tweaks

*Ubuntu 8.04 Tweaks - MSI WInd User wiki*
 NOTE: Kpowersave may screw suspend!
 Suspend and Hibernate are not currently supported running Ubuntu 8.04.1
on Windows versions of the Wind/Advent 4211 (see bug report here). Also,
suspend does not work when booting via wubi/grub4dos. The following
workaround (from this forum thread), however, seems to fix suspend
(sound, wifi, bluetooth, and the card reader are all confirmed to work
after multiple suspends).
 Instructions:
 The first step is to make power management less aggressive. This has
the following results:
     * the drive will park its heads a lot less thus the drive will have
substantially prolonged life.
     * the drive will be warmer (the right underside of the Wind may
heat up a bit).
     * battery span may be reduced (unconfirmed).
     * the drive will be switched off anyway during suspend/hibernate
 Open a terminal and type:
 sudo gedit /etc/hdparm.conf
 At the end of the file, paste the following:
 command\_line {
 hdparm -B 192 /dev/sda
 }
 The above line does not switch power management off completely. If you
want to do that, use the value 255 instead of 192. It will make the
drive even warmer (still, nothing to worry about, certainly less than
mad head parking), but there will be no more clicking.
 To force the setting without rebooting run:
 sudo hdparm -B 192 /dev/sda
 To fix sound, you will need to tweak the alsa modules options. Type the
following in a terminal:
 sudo gedit /etc/modprobe.d/alsa-base
 At the end of the file, paste the following:
 options snd-hda-intel model=targa-2ch-dig
 Note: If the above fix doesn't work for suspend, try running the
following three commands:
 echo SUSPEND\_MODULES="ehci-hcd" > /tmp/unload\_modules
 chmod +x /tmp/unload\_modules
 sudo mv /tmp/unload\_modules /etc/pm/config.d/unload\_modules
 Note: To make your Wind/Advent 4211 automatically suspend when the lid
is closed, go to:
 System => Preferences => Power Management
 To resume from suspend, press the power button.
 For more information and discussion about suspend and hibernation on
the Wind, see this forum thread and this one too.
 Fixing Hard Drive Clicking
 Note: The "Fixing Suspend" section above addresses this issue. If you
already opted to turn Power Management Off (Value 255), you will not
need to complete this step.
 Many users have reported a problem with hard drive clicking, sometimes
described as a repeated tick tick tick type of ticking sound. This is a
high frequency of load/unload cycles on the hard disk and it may shorten
the lifetime of your drive because the "Advanced Power Management
feature" is in a very aggressive mode.
 We must change that by using hdparm with option -B
 Man for -B = Set Advanced Power Management feature, if the drive
supports it. A low value means aggressive power management and a high
value means better performance. A value of 255 will disable apm on the
drive.
 Open a terminal and type the following:
 sudo hdparm -B 254 /dev/sda
 For more information go here
 Enabling and Customizing Compiz Fusion
 Compiz Fusion provides a number of fancy 3-D effects on your desktop,
including the infamous cube (see video demonstration here).
 First, install the CompizConfig Settings Manager (CCSM):
 sudo apt-get install compizconfig-settings-manager
 Then, add the emerald theme manager:
 sudo apt-get install emerald
 Next, enable Advanced Desktop Effects by going to "Appearance
Preferences" and checking the "Custom" box:
     * System => Preferences => Appearance => Visual Effects => Custom
(check)
 Now, open the CompizConfig Settings Manager (CCSM) from:
     * System => Preferences => Advanced Desktop Effects Settings
 Configure Compiz to your liking. For some suggestions and help, check
out Forlong's Blog.
 Finally, you will want to make the Emerald window decorator start
automatically whenever you log in to your desktop. Go to:
     * System => Preferences => Advanced Desktop Effects Settings
 Under the "Effects" group there is a "Window Decoration" icon. Select
it, and change the "Command" value to "emerald --replace" (without the
quotes). Click on "Back" and then "Close" to close the Compiz
configuration window.
 Now press CTRL + ALT + Backspace to end your current desktop session
(or simply log out), then log in again. Compiz Fusion should now be
fully functional.
 Compiz-Switch (optional) is a handy little tool that provides a simple
way to switch between Compiz and the window manager of your desktop
environment (Gnome or Xfce). Follow the simple installation instructions
on Forlong's Blog.
 Desktop Themes
 For suggestions about installing themes and customizing your desktop,
check out CatsWhoCode.com.
 Playing Restricted Formats (mp3, Quicktime, WMV, Flash, etc)
 Ubuntu can play the most popular non-free media formats, including DVD,
MP3, Quicktime, Windows Media, and more by installing the
ubuntu-restricted-extras package:
 sudo apt-get install ubuntu-restricted-extras
 Adding the Medibuntu Repository
 Medibuntu (Multimedia, Entertainment & Distractions In Ubuntu) is a
repository of packages that cannot be included into the Ubuntu
distribution for legal reasons (copyright, license, patent, etc). Below
are the instructions to add the Medibuntu repository to your system's
list of APT repositories. These instructions and additional information
about Medibuntu can also be found here here.
 Add Medibuntu to your sources.list, as well as its GPG key to your
keyring.
 sudo wget http://www.medibuntu.org/sources.list.d/hardy.list -O
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/medibuntu.list
 Then, add the GPG Key:
 sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install medibuntu-keyring && sudo
apt-get update
 You may be asked to accept this package even though it cannot be
authenticated. This is normal; typing "Yes" means you trust Medibuntu.
 Once you have added the Medibuntu repository, you can easily install a
number of useful packages. To play encrypted DVDs, for instance, the
libdvdcss2 package is essential. libdvdcss is a simple library designed
for accessing DVDs like a block device without having to bother about
the decryption. To install:
 sudo apt-get install libdvdcss2
 There are a few formats such as certain Windows formats, Real, and
Apple Quicktime which do not have native codecs under Linux. To work
around this issue, external binary codecs are used instead to play these
formats. To install:
 sudo apt-get install w32codecs
 You can increase the stability of Flash 9 by adding libflashsupport. In
a terminal type:
 sudo apt-get install libflashsupport
 Activating the Webcam
 To turn the webcam on/off, press fn and F6 together. You can test the
webcam by installing Cheese and/or Skype (see instructions below).
 Pairing a Bluetooth Mouse
    1. To turn on bluetooth, press the Fn and F11 keys a few times until
the blue bluetooth indicator light at the base of your Wind/Advent 4211
is illuminated.
    2. To pair your computer with your bluetooth mouse, first make it
discoverable (e.g. push the "connect" button on the bottom of the mouse)
and then right click on the bluetooth icon in the top right panel of
your desktop.
    3. Select "Browse Device."
    4. Once your mouse is connected, right click on the bluetooth icon
again and select "Preferences." Highlight your mouse under "Bonded
Devices" and push the "Set Trusted" button (your mouse should now
automatically connect during future sessions).
    5. Note: If you are unable to connect your mouse using the above
method, try opening a terminal (with your mouse set to discoverable) and
type:
 sudo hidd --search
 Once your mouse is connected, right click on the bluetooth icon again
and select "Preferences." Highlight your mouse under "Bonded Devices"
and push the "Set Trusted" button.
 Installing Flash Player 10 for Linux
 Note: The Flash 10 package link below appears to be broken. For now,
you may want to stick with Flash 9 or find another package to install.
 To install Flash Player 10 for Linux, follow these instructions
(originally written by Tom at Rockmanx).
 First, remove your existing Flash plugin, if you have one installed.
This command will remove Flash 9 if you installed it from Ubuntu's
repository:
 sudo apt-get remove flashplugin-nonfree
 Download and extract the Flash Player 10 Beta to your home directory:
 wget -O -
http://download.macromedia.com/pub/labs/flashplayer10/flashplayer10\_install\_linux\_070208.tar.gz
| tar xz -C ~ |
 The user plugins folder may not exist yet, try to create it but ignore
any errors if the directory already exists:
 mkdir ~/.mozilla/plugins/
 Copy the Flash plugin the the Firefox plugins directory to install it:
 cp ~/install\_flash\_player\_10\_linux/libflashplayer.so
~/.mozilla/plugins/libflashplayer.so
 Remove the directory that was downloaded (if you get a warning about
deleting a write-protected file, press y and Enter to continue):
 rm -r ~/install\_flash\_player\_10\_linux
 Restart Firefox to enable the new plugin.
 And just in case, here's how to uninstall Flash Player 10.
 Remove the new plugin:
 rm ~/.mozilla/plugins/libflashplayer.so
 Reinstall Flash 9 from the repositories (if you wish):
 sudo apt-get install flashplugin-nonfree
 Installing Microsoft Core Fonts
 If you want Arial, Georgia, Times New Roman, Verdona, etc., you can
install the following package that will run a script to download and
unpack these font packages and install them on your system.
 Note: Microsoft used to distribute their core fonts in a package -- the
MS core web fonts. They withdrew them a couple of years ago, but it's
still legal to redistribute them in their original (.CAB -- windows
installer) packaging and licensing.
 To install the Microsoft Core Fonts package, use:
 sudo apt-get install msttcorefonts
 Optimizing Ubuntu for the 1024x600 Screen
 Smaller Fonts
 You may want to reduce the default font resolution from 96 to 83:
     * System => Preferences => Appearance => Fonts => Details (button)
 GTK theme
 You can also install the compact GTK theme that can be found here.
 It comes in different colors and with a nice icon theme.
 Dock
 The lower panel (task bar) can be replaced with an auto-hiding
dock-like bar which sits at the bottom of the screen.
    1. Option 1: Cairo-Dock
    2. Option 2: Avant Window Navigator (Awn)
 There is a theme for Cairo-Dock specially designed to fit the MSI
Wind's screen. It is available to download from
http://www.devzero.net/cairo-dock/Wind.tar.gz. To install it untar it to
the .cairo-dock/themes subdirectory in your home directory and restart
cairo-dock.
 Gnome Fullscreen Mode
 In Gnome, any application can be made to take up the whole screen,
however, there is no default key binding set up. To setup a key binding
(suggested is Alt + F11) to toggle fullscreen mode, go to System >
Preferences > Keyboard Shortcuts > Window Management > Toggle Fullscreen
Mode and select a keybinding.
 This screen mode can flicker if compiz is enabled. To fix that problem,
install compizconfig-settings-manager by opening up the Terminal
application and typing:
 sudo apt-get install compizconfig-settings-manager
 Then, go to to System > Advanced Desktop Effects Settings, click the
"General Options" button and untick "Unredirect Fullscreen Windows". You
can now enable an application to be displayed taking up the whole
1024x600 screen resolution.
 Firefox
 To free up some viewing space in Firefox, you may want to hide the
Bookmarks Toolbar:
     * View => Toolbars => Bookmarks Toolbar (uncheck)
 You may also want to use smaller icons on the normal toolbar:
     * View => Toolbars => Customize => Use Small Icons (check)
 In addition to these options you may want to use the Firefox fullscreen
mode, accessible my pressing F11 whilst using Firefox.
 Some useful Firefox Add-ons:
     * Autohide gives you total control over your favorite browser's
fullscreen mode. Autohide lets you choose what you'd like to be able to
see at any given time once you go fullscreen. You may want to set it as
the default view.
     * AddBlockPlus (ABP) is another useful add-on which will block most
advertisements, collapsing the space they take up, meaning you only view
the useful content.
     * Vimperator: Additionally, if you are familiar with VIM (or wmii),
you might want to try out the Vimperator add-on which removes the
toolbar and address bar, replacing them with a VIM-like command line.
 Note: Firefox Add-ons can be easily installed by navigating to: Tools
=> Add-ons => Get Extensions (click link)
 Thunderbird
 If you're running Thunderbird (see "Suggested Applications" section
below), you may want to install the Littlebird Add-on.
 wmii
 wmii is a small tiling window manager, enabling efficient usage of the
screen area. You can install it using apt-get:
 sudo apt-get install wmii
 Then, you can select it by clicking "Sessions" in the login screen.
'Note: It's not recommended to make wmii your default window manager at
first, since many people find it hard to learn.
 Xfce
 Xfce is a lightweight desktop environment for unix-like operating
systems. It allows any application to run in full screen mode (press Alt
+ F11 to take up the full screen - Press Alt + F11 again to take the
application out of full screen mode). For more information and
installation instructions, check out out the Ubuntu 8.04 Hardy Heron
page.
 Suggested Hardware Enhancements:
 Note: While each of the suggested hardware enhancements can certainly
improve your system, keep in mind that opening up the back of your
Wind/Advent 4211 "may" (and in some cases most likely "will") void the
warranty. User discretion is always advised.
 Battery
 The 3 cell batteries supplied with the first generation of the MSI
Wind/Advent 4211 are inadequate. Stay tuned for info about MSI and third
party 6 Cell battery options. For those interested in a DIY 9 cell
option, check out this forum thread.
 And for those less adventurous, here are some other portable power
options:
    1. Powergorilla
    2. Universal External Battery
    3. External laptop batteries in US
 Hard Drive
 For those wanting a faster drive or who are not satisfied with the 80GB
of storage space (Torrent junkies, those with multiple OSs, etc), the
hard drive can be removed and replaced with relative ease. One option is
to swap out the supplied 80GB drive with Western Digital's My Passport
Essential 320GB USB 2.0 portable hard drive. The advantage of this
approach is that you end up with a huge drive on your Wind/Advent 4211
and a portable enclosure for your original 80GB drive (AKA a bonus 80GB
portable USB 2.0 hard drive). Also, according to MSIWind.net user Ben in
in this forum thread, the 320GB drive runs faster than the original 80GB
drive. For installation instructions, check out MSIWind.net user
naturaldisasta's cubicleofdoom.com.
 Western Digital's Scorpio SATA drives have also been reported to work
nicely in the Wind/Advent 4211. Check out Laptop Magazine's How To for
more details.
 The OCZ 64GB SSD drive has been tested in the Wind and works out of the
box. Initial testing shows a fair decrease in boot speed (49 seconds
with the stock hard drive, 37 with the SSD) and much faster application
start (OO writer 17 seconds with the stock hard drive, 7 seconds with
the SSD). It also has the effect of increasing battery life (from about
1 hours 30 minutes to 2 hours on a simple test).
 RAM
 The Windows version of the MSI Wind/Advent 4211 are shipped with 1GB of
RAM soldered to the board (1GB SODIMM). While Ubuntu is a very efficient
OS, there are still obvious advantages to increasing your system's RAM
(there is an empty slot on board and the system will recognize up to
2GB). The procedure itself is very simple. You can find an easy
step-by-step manual at Laptop Magazine.
 Touch Screen
 Stay tuned for more info about adding a touch screen to your
Wind/Advent 4211. In the meantime, check out JKKmobile.com's Eee PC 900
with touch screen mod (with video and photos).
 Wireless Card
 There is currently no native Ubuntu 8.04.1 wireless support on Windows
versions of the MSI Wind/Advent 4211 due to the wireless card supplied
with the system (although you can compile your own drivers by following
the steps listed in forum posting). If you would like to have native
support for wireless under Ubuntu 8.04.1, your best option at this point
is to replace the supplied Realtech RTL8187SE wireless card. Suitable
wireless cards can be found for under 0 (new) and the replacement
procedure only takes a few minutes to complete. For more details and
instructions, visit the "Wireless" section of the Ubuntu 8.04 Hardy
Heron page.
 Suggested Software Enhancements:
 The following is a selective list of applications not included in the
basic Ubuntu Desktop Edition that can be easily installed to enhance and
expand your system. For a comprehensive list of Linux software to run on
your Wind/Advent 4211, visit the Linux Alternative Project.
 Avidemux
 Avidemux works well as a lightweight video editor. Version 2.4.1 has
.flv support which allows you to edit flash files from YouTube etc.
 sudo apt-get install avidemux
 Audacity
 Audacity works well as a basic sound editor (it supports supports Ogg
Vorbis, MP3, WAV, AIFF, and AU): http://audacity.sourceforge.net/
 sudo apt-get install audacity
 Cheese
 Cheese is a program to take pictures and videos from your webcam. You
can install it with:
 sudo apt-get install cheese
 Inkscape
 Inkscape is a very good Vector graphics program
http://www.inkscape.org/
 You can install it with:
 sudo apt-get install inkscape
 Scribus
 Scribus is a desktop publishing program that gives you full control
over page layouts. It works with CMYK color profiles and has PDF output.
http://www.scribus.net/
 You can install it with:
 sudo apt-get install scribus
 Skype
 You can download the latest version of Skype for Linux by visiting:
http://www.skype.com/download/skype/linux/choose
 Note: If you added the Medibuntu repository (directions above), you can
also add Skype with:
 sudo apt-get install skype
 Thunderbird
 Thunderbird is a cross-platform email and news client.
 sudo apt-get install thunderbird
 Some useful Thunderbird Add-ons:
     * Sync Kolab to synchronize your address book across all computers
running Thunderbird.
     * Signature Switch to easily use multiple email signatures.
     * SmtpSelect to easily switch your outgoing mail server (helpful
when travelling or going between home and work).
 Note: Thunderbird Add-ons can be easily installed by navigating to:
Tools => Add-ons => Get Extensions (click link)
 VLC
 A cross platform media player for various audio and video formats
(MPEG-1, MPEG-2, MPEG-4, DivX, mp3, ogg, flv, etc). You can install it
with:
 sudo apt-get install vlc
 Retrieved from "http://wiki.msiwind.net/index.php/Ubuntu\_8.04\_Tweaks"
 Views
     * Page
     * Discussion
     * View source
     * History
 Personal tools
     * Log in / create account
 Navigation
     * Main Page
     * Community portal
     * Current events
     * Recent changes
     * Random page
     * Help
     * Donations
 Search
  
 Toolbox
     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Printable version
     * Permanent link
 Powered by MediaWiki
     * This page was last modified 06:25, 16 August 2008.
     * This page has been accessed 9,010 times.
     * Privacy policy
     * About MSI WInd User wiki
     * Disclaimers
 http://wiki.msiwind.net/index.php/Ubuntu\_8.04\_Tweaks

**** new netbook stuff 2 look for

-  bcklight keyboard
-  long batt life
-  screen res above x600
-  normal mouse pad
-  Big HD..320 if possible

*** Optical media

*How To Repair & Recover Data From Damaged CD's Or DVD's
*
 Scratches that are perpendicular (going from the center outwards) are
generally less harmful or damaging than the scratches that go along the
spiral. So if your CD/DVD has more of the latter ones, then the chances
of a good recovery may be bleak. Nevertheless, Thou shall try till thou
art able to Make good Use Of thy media.
 Attempt to recover data
 First and foremost try some software apps to make your life easier and
attempt to recover data from the disc. You can try more then one
application if you didn't succeed with previous ones. I have had
experiences in the past when one of them has done a better job than the
others either in the amount of data that is recovered or the speed with
which it is recovered. However most of the time CD Recovery Toolbox has
come up on top.
 Just insert the damaged CD, DVD, HD DVD (if you still use them) or
Blue-Ray disc and the software will show you the list of files and
folders found on the disc. Choose the ones you want to recover and click
next. The process can be very slow mind you so just be patient.
 CD Recovery Toolbox has been covered in detail on MakeUseOf earlier.
Check it out if you need more details.
 Another software solution you can try is Roadkil's Unstoppable Copier.
It is also a similar software that is capable of recovering data from
damaged or scratched discs. If the recovery is taking too long you can
also pause, save and resume sessions at some other time.
 If you use Linux you can try ddrescue for recovery needs. It is a
command line tool offering plenty of options as you can see below:
 Attempt to repair the damaged CDs
 If the disc has profound scratches you can try to repair those
scratches to make the disc playable again. The best way to do this is to
use a whitening toothpaste or some polish (specially those used by
opticians) although Brasso also works.
     * First clean the surface of the disc with a soft lint-free cloth.
You can use a gentle detergent (or rubbing alcohol) if there are some
grease spots. Make sure there are no finger prints or dust particles.
Don't scrub too hard as you may do more harm than good this way.
     * Now apply some toothpaste or polish on the scratched surface. It
is best to start with a minimum amount of either, or else you will have
your work really cut out trying to buff away the remainder.
     * Now rub gently with a cloth moving from the center outwards.
 If you did a good job, you will actually see the scratch diminishing,
or if it was a faint one, it might just disappear.
 The success with this method varies greatly. It is hit and miss. I have
had an equal amount of successes and failures. Sometimes it works
allowing you to even read data from that part, other times it is of no
use at all.
 Some Tips
     * Try recovery in a CD/DVD writer as opposed to a reader. Writers
are generally more precise and can see the tracks better.
     * If possible try recovery on the same drive that was used to
create the disc. Chances of a good read have been found to increase if
you use the same drive or at least the same manufacturer.
     * If nothing helps you can go to music stores and show them your
disc. Such stores usually have a CD refinishing machine and may be able
to do a better job.
     * As soon as any of the above methods works, don't think even twice
and just create another copy of the disc.
     * Buy good quality media.
     * Take good care of your CDs

**** How To Repair & Recover Data From Damaged CD's Or DVD's

*** hp pavillion

*HP pavilion bios startup
*
 to start HP pavilion bios start up- Press F1

*** mother board error codes

*Standard Original IBM POST Error Codes
*
 1 short beep    Normal POST - system is ok
 2 short beeps       POST Error - error code shown on screen
 No beep        Power supply or system board problem
 Continuous beep       Power supply, system board, or keyboard problem
 Repeating short beeps    Power supply or system board problem
 1 long, 1 short beep    System board problem
 1 long, 2 short beeps    Display adapter problem (MDA, CGA)
 1 long, 3 short beeps    Enhanced Graphics Adapter (EGA)
 3 long beeps       3270 keyboard card

*** clean lcd screens

 *Cleaning laptop and LCD monitor
*
 Cleaning laptop and LCD monitor screens is different from cleaning the
usual CRT screens and requires some additional care and safeguards. A
large part of this is because the traditional CRT screen is made up of
glass, so it is a lot less prone to scratches from dust particles then
your LCD screen.
  
 You can follow these steps and guidelines while cleaning your laptop or
LCD monitor to keep out of harm's way and have a sparkling clean screen.
  Materials you would need

-  A soft lint free cotton cloth (microfiber cloth works best).
-  Distilled Water. Isopropyl Alcohol or white vinegar (if there are oil
   stains)
-  A bottle (atomizer bottle works best)

  
 [[tech_files/img/Image_sGhpWd4l2g2HVF9z4qdlkw_0001.png]]
  How to Clean Your LCD Monitor
  

-  If it is just dust you are getting rid of, distilled water would be
   sufficient and you don't need any other cleansing agent. If there are
   fingerprints on the screen or some oily stains than the best thing to
   use is a solution of distilled water and isopropyl alcohol. Note that
   you should NEVER clean off the screen with a dry cloth. This way the
   dust particles can easily scratch the surface of the screen.
-  If you are going to need Isopropyl Alcohol, you should make a
   solution consisting of equal amounts of distilled water and isopropyl
   alcohol.
-  You then need to put this solution (or just distilled water if that
   is the case) into an atomizer bottle.
-  Spray the contents of the bottle onto the soft lint free cloth, DO
   NOT spray directly on the screen, make sure that you are holding the
   cloth away from laptop when spraying. A damp cloth (or perhaps an
   edge of cloth) is what we are looking for, we don't need to soak it
   in the solution.
-  Gently wipe the screen with the cloth. Horizontal and vertical
   movements work best, however if there are areas that need a little
   extra attention or streaks going along the screen, you can
   concentrate on the area with some circular movements.

 What you should not do
 [[tech_files/img/Image_sGhpWd4l2g2HVF9z4qdlkw_0002.png]]
  
 I have been pointing out the Do's and the Don'ts all along, and here
are some more absolute NO-NO's:

-  Never use cleansing agents like window cleaners, soap solutions etc.
   These contain chemicals that can harm the screen. In particular you
   should avoid anything that contains the likes of ammonia, acetone,
   toluene or ethyl alcohol
-  .Don't spray directly on the screen. If you can't find an atomizer
   bottle, you can pour some liquid onto the cloth just make sure it is
   not soaking wet. Again do all this away from the lapto
-  pDo not use tissue papers, newspaper or shower towels to clean the
   screen. You can easily scratch the screen with these
-  .Don't use tap water, it always contains some dissolved salts that
   can harm the screen
-  .Don't clean while the laptop/computer is powered on. Turning off not
   only gives you a nice black screen that lets you see the stains
   easily, you also avoid the risk of damaging your computer
   accidentally
-  .Don't put too much pressure on the screen while cleaning. Doing so
   can permanently damage the screen

.

*** abit is7

**** is7\_series.pdf

[[tech_files/attach/is7_series.pdf][Attachment #05 (is7\_series.pdf)]]

*** edimax router

**** br-6215srg manual v1.1\_20061226.pdf

[[tech_files/attach/br-6215srg%20manual%20v1.1_20061226.pdf][Attachment
#06 (br-6215srg manual v1.1\_20061226.pdf)]]

*** hp 5610

**** c00461378.pdf

[[tech_files/attach/c00461378.pdf][Attachment #07 (c00461378.pdf)]]

*** HP prolienat

**** bios key

press F10
 hp dosent offer a boot menu in microserver

** graphics/customize/theming
*** unicode characters 
༜ ⌘ ⎈ ▣ ◨ ★ ☎ ☘  ⚉  ◈
◈ ⚫ ⚑ ⚒ ✔✓ ✜ ✙ ✠ ✥ ✤ ✪
✬✱✹ ✾ ✽ ❤ ➠ ⭤⮀☍⛢

*** weather codes

*Weather.com Codes for Israel*
 ISXX0008-Haifa
 ISXX0008-Hertzlya

*** tips

*resize photos quickly
*
 install gthumbviewer which has in tools a batch converter!

*** oxygen

**** color palette

[[tech_files/img/Image_DwesYHPJmU.JaziJDAoYIA_0001.png]]

**** tips

the colour value B7D0E6 looks good as a window background on KDE

*** shiki theme

gnome-panel transparency in shiki themes
 In the gtkrc file it says to go into the panel.rc file to edit the
panel properties. Then sure enough in panel.rc all I had to do was
comment out the following line:
 bg\_pixmap[NORMAL] = "/Panels/panel-bg-dark.png" # Disable for normal
panel backgrounds.
 *editing the panel properties
*style "theme-panel"
 {
    #bg\_pixmap[NORMAL]   = "/Panels/panel-bg-dark.png" # *Disable for
normal panel backgrounds.*
    bg[SELECTED]   = shade (0.85, @selected\_bg\_color) # Makes selected
items dark.
    bg[NORMAL]   = "#3c3c3c" # Makes panel background dark.
    bg[PRELIGHT]   = shade (0.85, @selected\_bg\_color) # Makes panel
button prelight dark.
    bg[ACTIVE]   = shade (0.60, @bg\_color) # Makes active buttons dark.
    bg[INSENSITIVE]   = "#3C3C3C"
    fg[NORMAL]   = "#606060" # Makes panel text light. *PANEL TEXT
COLOR*
    fg[PRELIGHT]   = @selected\_fg\_color # Makes prelighted text
colored.
    fg[SELECTED]   = @selected\_fg\_color # Makes prelighted text
colored.
    fg[ACTIVE]   = @selected\_fg\_color # Makes active text colored.
    fg[INSENSITIVE]   = "#666666" # Color for insensitive text.
    text[NORMAL]   = "#E6E6E6"
    text[PRELIGHT]   = @selected\_fg\_color # Makes prelighted text
colored.
    text[SELECTED]   = @selected\_fg\_color # Makes prelighted text
colored.
    text[ACTIVE]   = @selected\_fg\_color # Makes active text colored.
    text[INSENSITIVE]   = "#666666"
    engine "murrine" {
       roundness = 0 # This sets the roundness of panel items.
    }
 }

*** black humanity zeltak

**** change icons

***** icons i like for humanity

[[tech_files/img/Image_UdtLYg4S1iEjjWWhBH5J9Q_0001.png]]
 full screen
 [[tech_files/img/Image_UdtLYg4S1iEjjWWhBH5J9Q_0002.png]]
 [[tech_files/img/Image_UdtLYg4S1iEjjWWhBH5J9Q_0003.png]]
 [[tech_files/img/Image_UdtLYg4S1iEjjWWhBH5J9Q_0004.png]]
 [[tech_files/img/Image_UdtLYg4S1iEjjWWhBH5J9Q_0005.png]]
 [[tech_files/img/Image_UdtLYg4S1iEjjWWhBH5J9Q_0006.png]]
 [[tech_files/img/Image_UdtLYg4S1iEjjWWhBH5J9Q_0007.png]]
 [[tech_files/img/Image_UdtLYg4S1iEjjWWhBH5J9Q_0008.png]]
 lock screen
 logout

***** icons t change

[[tech_files/img/Image_Q.13F8GFckEP9rRrvRvrqQ_0001.png]]
 [[tech_files/img/Image_Q.13F8GFckEP9rRrvRvrqQ_0002.png]]
 [[tech_files/img/Image_Q.13F8GFckEP9rRrvRvrqQ_0003.png]]

[[tech_files/img/Image_Q.13F8GFckEP9rRrvRvrqQ_0004.png]][[tech_files/img/Image_Q.13F8GFckEP9rRrvRvrqQ_0005.png]]

*** Humanity colors

 #606060
 humanity grey
 light humanity
 969696ee
 grey to black
 [[tech_files/img/Image_FAVTh.VnuxKsT8bQhRK7bQ_0001.png]]
 grey border 0.3 color 969696ee

** gen glossary-info

*** audio glossary

*Album Artist:*
 The artist that the album *is filed under*.
 For example an Elvis Costello and the Imposters record would have an
"Album Artist" of "Elvis Costello" and a "Track Arist" of "Elvis
Costello and the Imposters"
 *Track Artist:*
 The artist for an individual track on a compilation CD. For example the
first song on the soundtrack to the film Batman Forever, which is "Hold
Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me" by the band U2, would have an "Album
Artist" of "Various Artists" and a "Track Artist" of “U2″

** Networking
*** Create LAN connectors
the correct order with lan cables are

| 1 | Orange-white |
| 2 | Orange       |
| 3 | Green-white  |
| 4 | Blue         |
| 5 | Blue-white   |
| 6 | Green        |
| 7 | Brown-white  |
| 8 | Brown        |

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-23 21:34:05
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-23_21:34:04.png]]
*** Create wall LAN connectors
the correct order with wall mounted lan connectors are
| Brown-white | Orange-white |
| Brown       | Orange       |
| Blue-white  | Green-white  |
|             | Green        |
| Blue        |              |


#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-23 22:01:58
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-23_22:01:58.png]]

*** 'Home LAN setup'- based on `10.0.0.X` sub-network
**** Routers
the house central hub is located in the electricity closet utility closet.

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-23 22:01:29
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-23_22:01:29.png]]

Current setup (Tapouch street as of 1.6.2014) has:
$Note for more in depth details on router setups look here:$ [[*current%20tapouch%207%20setup%2012.6.2014][current tapouch 7 setup 12.6.2014]]
*****  Bezeq VDSL model (10.0.0.138)
acting as:
1)`dialer` see [[*current%20tapouch%207%20setup%2012.6.2014][current tapouch 7 setup 12.6.2014]]
2)`DHCP`

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-23 21:45:51
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-23_21:45:51.png]]
***** Belkin Wifi Router(10.0.0.44)

Acting as a wifi provider and Switch
the dialer is disabled

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-23 21:48:33
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-23_21:48:33.png]]

the following info is Used

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-23 21:48:51
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-23_21:48:51.png]]
also make sure the DHCP server is disabled
**** Physical LAN lines

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-23 22:25:03
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-23_22:25:03.png]]
**** IP tables
| Machine | IP |

** Routers
**** bezeq VDSL modem (boradcom chip) 
***** Default Password
U:Admin
P:Admin
***** add fixed IPS via MACadress and DHCP
under LAN section you will see the DHCP settings
press the 'add entries' button to add mac--IP 

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2015-01-16 13:20:15
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2015/screenshot_2015-01-16_13:20:15.png]]
**** dd-wrt
***** Hardware reset

Hard Reset (aka 30/30/30 reset):
 The following procedure will clear out the NVRAM and set dd-wrt back to
default values:
 With the unit powered on, press and hold the reset button on back of
unit for 30 seconds
 Without releasing the reset button, unplug the unit and hold reset for
another 30 seconds
 Plug the unit back in STILL holding the reset button a final 30 seconds
(please note that this step can put Asus devices into recovery
mode...see note below!)
 This procedure should be done BEFORE and AFTER every firmware
upgrade/downgrade.

***** restart network and get new dhcp IP on linux

first kill off any running dhcp deamon:

 sudo killall dhcpcd

 then issue this to get a new IP address:

 sudo dhcpcd eth0

***** belkin flash ddwrt

Okay, I successfully installed DD-WRT in my Belkin f7d3302 v1000.
 Below is my experience
 1) Downloaded the
 Code:   
 Mini: dd-wrt.v24-16773\_NEWD-2\_K2.6\_mini\_f7d3302.bin
                 
 Mega: dd-wrt.v24-16773\_NEWD-2\_K2.6\_mega.bin   
 2) Connected the router via wired LAN to my Macbook, static network
parameters
 Code:   
 IP: 192.168.2.8
 Subnet: 255.255.255.0
 Gateway: 192.168.2.1   
 3) Booted the router to CFE min webserver
 Code:   
 Hold down the reset button on the back of the router, while keppin it
held, plug the power in, and still keep the button pressed for 10
seconds. While still holding it, point the browser (IE v8) to
http://192.168.2.1 . CFE Mini webserver should be loaded, if not repeat
the process all over.   
 4) From here, select the Mini firmware file downloaded
(dd-wrt.v24-16773\_NEWD-2\_K2.6\_mini\_f7d3302.bin) and click upload and
waited for it to reboot.
 (After the firmware starts to upload, please get away from your place.
Resettin or Rebootin the router will brick the device)
 5) After 10 mins, router was running. Visited http://192.168.1.1 and I
could see the dd-wrt router page. (First level of success!!!!)
 6) Assigned a new user name and password.
 7) Clicked Setup->Basic setup and configured it for my ISP. (Static IP
connection, as my router connects to an ADSL modem)
 8. Clicked "Save" and "Apply Settings". Checked If am online, but
unfortunately not.
 9) Did a 30/30/30
 Code:   
 Hold Reset Button 30 secs, unplug power with reset button still held
in... keep power out for 30, and plug power back in while still holding
the reset for 30 more seconds   
 10) Checked the internet and it was working. (Second level of
success!!!!)
 11) Navigated to Administration->Firmware Upgrade->Selected the Mega
bin downloaded previously (dd-wrt.v24-16773\_NEWD-2\_K2.6\_mega.bin) and
clicked upgrade. (Now again, please get away from your place. Resettin
or Rebootin the router will brick the device)
 12) After 10 mins, router was running. Visited http://192.168.1.1 and I
could see the dd-wrt router page. (Thrid level of success!!!!)
 13) Internet was still working Smile Smile
 Basic dd-wrt firmware flashin is done and router is up. Now, you may
navigate to various places in router page and needed options can be
selected.
 Goto Services->Services->"Secure Shell". Enable SShd for SSH access
(via putty/winSCP)
 14) Installed Optware utilities (Check Optware the right way).
Configured Samba server (Check Samba tutorial at Wiki). (Fourth level of
success!!!)
 15) Configured Transmission for torrent downloads. (Check Transmission
tutorial in wiki)
 16) Unplugged my external hard drive and plugged in the 3G USB modem.
Navigated to Setup->Basic Setup, in WAN connection type, selected
"3G/UMTS" and configured it as per my 3G network and voila, within few
seconds, I could access the internet (with my macbook connected to the
router via Wifi 802.11n only mode)
 17) Surprisingly, there was an issue with date and time maintained in
the router.
 18. Enabled the NTP client and chose my UTC settings, saved and
rebooted.
 19) Could not access the 192.168.1.1, router page via Wifi. So
disabled, Wifi and connected to router via wired LAN and checked for
192.168.1.1. I could access the router page after 10 mins. But, clock
hadn't synced yet.
 20) Searched the dd-wrt forum and got a ntp server,
 Code:   
 time-b.timefreq.bldrdoc.gov   
 Specified this in the NTP time settings, saved and reboot. I could
access the router, and the time was set to current.
 Now, I need some help scheduling torrent downloads, using Transmission
and also to get the transmission keep running between reboots. Please
help me here.
 Overall, It was a great experience installing and configuring DD-WRT
firmware into my Belkin router. Its out of the box support for 3G/UMTS
actually surprised me. Samba support is also great. Great going guys!!!!

***** comcast WAN

*Use this setup:*
 [[tech_files/img/Image_Gm89GZ8OCwKXLPdOKCf0fw_0001.png]]

***** Static DHCP

Configuration
 -Log into the DD-WRT Web GUI
     -Go to the Services tab
     -DHCP Daemon should be enabled
     -If there is no blank slot under "Static Leases", click Add
     -Enter the MAC address of the client interface, the hostname of the
machine, and the desired IP address for this machine. Note that you
cannot
     reserve the same IP address for two different MAC addresses (e.g.
both the wired and wireless interfaces of a device).
     -Scroll to the bottom of the page and save your changes.
 [[tech_files/img/Image_NPkJR2Wu79Rig3LVIbmfuA_0001.png]]
 Note: You must either Save or Apply the page each time you've added and
filled out a new static lease. Clicking the Add button refreshes the
page without saving what you entered. If you try to add multiple blank
leases and fill them all out at once then you will encounter a bug that
the GUI thinks they are duplicate entries.
 Note: A blank lease duration means it will be an infinite lease (never
expires). Setting a lease duration will allow you to change the static
lease information later on and have the host automatically get the new
information without having to manually release/renew the lease on the
host.

***** use ddns without WAN connected
@If your router doesnt have a WAN connection or if it doesn't have a public ip address on WAN then you must use external ip address check@


#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-08-08 12:49:04
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-08-08_12:49:04.png]]

***** port forward

﻿Port Range Forward
 [[tech_files/img/Image_VmNRbluxnnuzybgw8vvFlg_0001.png]]
 [[http://www.dd-wrt.com/wiki/index.php/Image:PortRangeForward.jpg][]]
[[http://www.dd-wrt.com/wiki/index.php/Image:PortRangeForward.jpg][P]]ortforwarding
for a web server and a bittorrent client

This is the most common port forwarding and always forwards ports to the
same machine (LAN IP) on the network.

-  Browse to the
   [[http://www.dd-wrt.com/wiki/index.php/Web_Interface][web
   interface]].
-  Click on the "NAT / QoS" tab.
-  Click on the "Port Range Forward" subtab.
-  Enter any *Application* name you'd like. This is for your own
   reference and does not matter to to the router.
-  Enter the *Start* port in the range you'd like to forward.
-  Enter the *End* port in the range you'd like to forward. If you're
   just forwarding 1 port, set them both equal.
-  Enter the local *IP Address* of the machine you'd like to forward the
   port to.
-  Check the "Enable" checkbox to enable forwarding for this port range.
-

If the computer you're forwarding to is configured by for automatic IP
address by DHCP, you will periodically have to update the last field to
reflect the machine's current Local IP Address.

Here you can see that connecting to <WAN\_IP\_Address>:80 will bring you
to the webserver on 192.168.1.2 and connecting to any port between 6881
and 6889 on <WAN\_IP\_Address> will bring you to the bittorrent client
on 192.168.1.2.

 Pasted from
<[[http://www.dd-wrt.com/wiki/index.php/Port_Forwarding][http://www.dd-wrt.com/wiki/index.php/Port\_Forwarding]]>

***** How to Auto-Reboot in DD-WRT (schedule reboot)
Log in to the DD-WRT router. Open a browser and enter your router's IP address, by default this is "192.168.1.1" unless you have changed this. Enter the username and password you have set to log in.
Click "Administration."
Click "Keep Alive." Click "Enable" next to "Schedule Reboot."
Choose either the "Interval" or the "Set time" you want to reboot.
***** DNSMasq Local Network ('symc' dynamic IP/local IP)

**Warning** you must reboot the device before you see the effects (IE
after you finish all the configs)
 why wouldn't you just update the HOSTS file on your local machine?
Well, you could, but not all devices support that feature. By using
DNSMasq the DNS change will work for anything connecting to your router,
including mobile devices such as phones and tablets.
 So what do you have to change in DD-WRT? Here's what you need to do:
 Go to the Services tab once you've logged into the administration
interface.
 Find the section labeled DNSMasq, and make sure the DNSMasq option is
enabled.
 In the Additional DNSMasq Options box type out your local DNS
configurations in the format of one entry per line:

address=/machine\_or\_domain\_name/ip\_address\_where\_machine\_or\_domain\_name
 is what you want to create/change DNS for (e.g. camera.example.com,
google.com, intranet) and ip\_address is the new IP address you want it
to point to.
 Apply the settings to DD-WRT, and you should be all set.
 This is an example of what your DNSMasq settings may look like:
 [[tech_files/img/Image_fq7mpRO487aztF2rylQGDw_0001.png]]
 If your devices don't see the changes after they've been made you may
need to try restarting them since that is often the simplest way to
clear the DNS cache.
**** current tapouch 7 setup 12.6.2014
the model (bezeq) is in the power closet and acts as a dialer with the following setup and using the `10.0.0.X` network subsystem 

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-12 16:33:15
#+attr_html: :width 300px
[[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-12_16:33:15.png]]

Interface Description Type Vlan802.1p VlanMuxId	Igmp NAT Firewall IPv4	IPv6 Mld Remove Edit	Action
ptm0.2	br_0_1_1	Bridge	N/A	N/A	 Disabled	 Disabled	 Disabled	 Enabled	 Enabled	 Disabled


#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-12 18:05:24
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-12_18:05:24.png]]


#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-12 18:05:40
#+attr_html: :width 300px
 [[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-12_18:05:40.png]]

press next in all other screens

in the LAN window enter the following

#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-12 19:00:27
#+attr_html: :width 300px
[[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-12_19:00:27.png]]

@note- make sure you have DHCP working and define the DNS servers.@

in the wireless router (dd-wrt) make sure WAN connections and DHCP are Disabled


#+DOWNLOADED: /tmp/screenshot.png @ 2014-06-12 21:36:53
#+attr_html: :width 300px
[[/home/zeltak/org/attach/images_2014/screenshot_2014-06-12_21:36:53.png]]
** Apple
**** iphone

***** Bypass activation screen

﻿In case an iPhone is stuck upon activation screen you're going to get
either SIM not valid or Activation Failed Error whilst activating your
iPhone without the official SIM card. What you need to do then is press
Home button once and you'll get
 several choices, tap on "Emergency Call" as well as dial any emergency
 number like 911 or even 112.
 Now quickly press and hold the power button so when you see "slide to
power off" tap "Cancel". Your iPhone will return to Invalid SIM card or
Activation Failed error screen, right now tap on "Touch to return to
call" on top and End the call. That's it! Your iPhone activation screen
is going to be bypassed and you'll get to iPhone's House screen.
  
 Pasted from
<[[http://www.unlockboot.com/2012/05/how-to-bypass-iphone-activation-screan.html][http://www.unlockboot.com/2012/05/how-to-bypass-iphone-activation-screan.html]]>
** D30
**** Bios startup key
     ?F1?-get to bios 
** Qnap ts-670 pro
*** reach Bios
connect hdmi
on boot press F2/Delete to reach Bios     
*** complie applications

this example is geared for tmux from source but can be used as a general install guide

1. make sure to install all needed dev packages:

#+BEGIN_SRC sh
ipkg install optware-devel gcc make libstdc++
#+END_SRC

2. download the source (you can use wget from ipkg) and extract it

3. before .config run this


#+BEGIN_SRC sh
export PATH=/opt/bin:$PATH
#then follow with 
./configure
# if you get no erros:
make
make install 
#+END_SRC
** WD cloud mirror
*** setup Rsync
Enable SSH on the NAS, (user is sshd and password is what you defined)

then use vi (or nano if installed) and edit 
1)vi /etc/rsync.secrets
$Note$ -This file will be left empty, but the file needs to be there

2)vi /etc/rsyncd.conf
and Type the following into the file

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
[shares]
# the following path works fine. When you setup the backup task in the Synology, you will be able
# to choose the desired WD share
path = /shares
uid = root
gid = root
read only = no
list = yes
# auth users = all
secrets file = /etc/rsyncd.secrets
# the IP address is the one of the Synology backing up to the WD. This provides some security.
hosts allow = IP NEEDED to allow
#+END_EXAMPLE 

$Note$  the IPNEEDED above is the other NAS IP that initiates the rsync

dont leave path = /shares other wise you will get space errors. change it to where your actual raid resides

path = /mnt/HD/HD_a2/rsync/

$Note$ - i create the rsync folder there previously with mkdir command

Same thing for  /etc/default/rsync

3)start in ssh CLI rsync
 
#+BEGIN_SRC sh :results none
rsync --daemon
#+END_SRC

 
Then go to the Synology and set up a backup destination as a r-sync compatible server. Enter the IP address of the WD (better to have a fixed one). 
Enter USER (sshd default) and PASS.

Pick the "shares" in the list of modules. Then create a backup task using this destination. At that point, you will be able to pick a WD share as the backup directory for all the Synology data.
Run your backup task.
 
To start rsync automatically on the WD reboot, do the following:
 
In /etc/init.d/rsync

change

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
RSYNC_ENABLE=false
#to
RSYNC_ENABLE=true
#+END_EXAMPLE


then in the synology/qnap backup, create a new rsync based sync and add the full path manually :

/mnt/HD/HD_a2/rsync/

into the `Backup module` section (dont use the suggested options)

** X1 carbon
*** fix clickpad buttons (until kernel 4.0 is released)
for a fix that lasts until a reboot
#+BEGIN_SRC sh 
sudo modprobe -r psmouse
sudo modprobe psmouse proto=imps
#+END_SRC

`to make this permenant`

#+BEGIN_SRC sh
sudo vim /etc/modprobe.d/touchpad.conf:

#then 
options psmouse proto=imps
#save 
update-initramfs -u
#+END_SRC

*** verical and horizontal scrolling
http://www.thinkwiki.org/wiki/How_to_configure_the_TrackPoint#Configuration_using_xinput create user/share/xsessions/mouse.sh (sudo chmod +x mouse.sh)

#+BEGIN_SRC sh :results none
xinput set-prop "PS/2 Synaptics TouchPad" "Evdev Wheel Emulation" 1
xinput set-prop "PS/2 Synaptics TouchPad" "Evdev Wheel Emulation Button" 2
xinput set-prop "PS/2 Synaptics TouchPad" "Evdev Wheel Emulation Timeout" 200
xinput set-prop "PS/2 Synaptics TouchPad" "Evdev Wheel Emulation Axes" 6 7 4 5
#+END_SRC
